Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "The Decline Of The West Vol Ii"
See other formats
THE  DECLINE 
OF  THE  WEST 


OSWALD  SPENGLER 

BORN  MAY  29,  1880  — DIED  MAY  8,  1936 


THE  DECLINE  OF 
THE  WEST 


[der  untergang  bes  abendl Andes] 

VOLUME  ONE 

FORM  AND  ACTUALITY 

[gestalt  und  wirklichkeit] 

V O L U M E TWO 

PERSPECTIVES  OF  WORLD-HISTORY 

[WELTHISTORISCHE  PERSPEKTIVEn] 


THE  DECLINE 
OF  THE  WEST 


PERSPECTIVES  OF  WORLD-HISTORY 


OSWALD  SPENGLER 


AUTHORIZED  TRANSLATION 
WITH  NOTES  BY 

CHARLES  FRANCIS  ATKINSON 


VOLUMETWO 

LONDON  : GEORGE  ALLEN  & UNWIN  LTD. 
RUSKIN  HOUSE,  40  MUSEUM  STREET,  W.C.  1 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


TRANSLATOR’S  NOTE 


In  the  annotations  to  this  volume  I have  followed  the  same  course  as  in  the 
first  — namely,  that  of  giving  primary  references  to  the  Encychfadia  Britan- 
nka  as  being  the  most  considerable  work  of  the  kind  that  is  really  widely 
distributed  in  both  the  English-speaking  fields,  though  occasionally  special 
encyclopaedias  or  other  works  are  referred  to.  Owing  to  the  more  definitely 
historical  character  of  this  volume,  as  compared  with  its  predecessor,  and 
particularly  its  stressing  of  a history  that  scarcely  figures  as  yet  in  a regular 
education  — the  ‘'Magian’*  — such  references  are  necessarily  more  numerous. 
Even  so,  more  might  perhaps  have  been  inserted,  with  advantage.  The  Trans- 
lator’s notes  have  no  pretension  to  be  critical  in  themselves,  though  here 
and  there  an  argument*  is  pointed  with  an  additional  example,  or  an  obvious 
criticism  anticipated.  In  each  domain  they  will  no  doubt  be  resented  by  an 
expert,  but  the  same  expert  will,  it  is  hoped,  find  them  useful  for  domains  not  his 
own. 

In  the  first  volume  of  the  English  version,  references  to  the  second  were 
necessarily  given  according  to  the  pagination  of  the  German.  A comparative 
table  of  English  and  German  page  numbers  has  therefore  been  inserted. 

London,  July  igzE  C.  F.  A. 


TABLE  OF  GERMAN  AND  ENGLISH  PAGES 


Germ.an 

English 

German 

English 

VOL.  11 

VOL.  II 

VOL.  U 

VOL.  II 

II 

9 

166 

238 

10 

180 

249 

16 

13 

i8z 

252 

18 

14 

X07 

273 

19 

15 

2.IX 

176 

xo 

16 

XX7 

189 

^5 

2-3 

2-32 

292 

X7 

^5 

2-3^  ■ 

196 

31 

2.7 

X40 

199 

33 

X9 

M2 

xoo 

34 

30 

M3 

xox 

36 

31 

244 

X03 

00 

33 

2-53 

X09 

41 

35 

z69 

xxo 

42- 

36 

2-75 

XX5 

51 

43 

2-93 

X40 

58 

48 

2-94 

X4I 

68 

60 

2.^6 

X4X 

80 

68 

2-43 

lOI 

87 

304 

X48 

104 

89 

305 

2.49 

109 

92- 

306 

2-49 

, no 

93 

307 

150 

II6' 

98 

324 

2.55 

II7 

99 

325 

X56 

. , ' 'JTL  , 

103 

316 

2.57 

135 

225 

H 

00 

X58  1 

137 

116 

32-3 

X65 

138 

118 

3M 

■■  ^65,, 

, 'i4z  . 

110 

3X7 

x68 

233 

32-8 

■x68::' 

TABLE  OF  GERMAN  AND  ENGLISH  PAGES 


Gbrman 

VOL.  II 

334 

341 

343 

345 

346 

350 

354 

357 

358 

359 

360 
36^ 

363 

365 

368 

369 

370 

373 

376 

378 

38z 

3^5 


English 

VOL.  II 

2-73 

2.79 

z8o 

z8i 

x8z 

x86 

x88 

2-S3 

2-93 

X9S 

x96 

2-97 

2-99 

300 

301 

303 

306 

307 
310 
313 


German 

VOL.  II 

403 

4ZI 

42-7 

441 

48z 

488 

52-1 

5x9 

539 

56X 

577 

589 

603 

607 

610 

616 
618 

614 

615 

6z6 

617 
631 


English 

VOL.  II 

317 

340 

345 

355 

388 

391 

416 

411 

430 

449 

460 

471 

481 

484 

486 

490 

491 

499 

500 

501 
501 
504 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  II 


Translator’s  No.te  v 

References  from  Volume  I - ■ vii 

Chapter  I.  Origin  and  Landscape.  (A)  The  Cosmic  and  the  Microcosm  i 

Plant  and  animal,  p.  3.  Being  and  waking-being,  p.  6.  Feeling,  understanding,  thinking, 
p.  9.  The  motion  problem,  p.  14.  Mass-soul,  p.  18. 

Chapter  II.  Origin  and  Landscape.  (B)  The  Group, of  the  Higher, Cul- 
tures ' ' II 

History-picture  and  nature-picture,  p.  13.  Human  and  world  history,  p.  x8..  Two  ages: 
primitive  .and  high  Cultures,  p.  33.  Survey  of  the  high  Cultures,  p.  39.  Hlstorylcss  mankind, 
p.  48.'  , , , 

Chapter  III.  Origin,  and  Landscape.  (C)  The  Relations  between  the 

Cultures  53 

** Influence,”  p.  55.  Roman  law,  p.  60.  Magian  law,  p.  67.  Western  law,  p.  75. 

Chapter  IV.  Cities  and  Peoples.  (A)  The  Soul  of  the,  City  ' 85 

Mycenae  and  Crete,  p.  87.,  The  .peasant,  p.  89. ' ■ World-history  is  urban  history,  p.  90. , Figure 
of  the  city,  p.  91.  City  and  intellect,  p.  96.  Spirit  of  the  world-city,  p.  99. , Sterility  and  disin- 
tegration, p.  103-  ■ 

Chapter  V.  Cities  AND  Peop,les.  (B),  Peoples,  Races,  Tongues  „ tii 

Streams  of  being  and  linkages  of  waking-being,  p.  114.  Exprcssion-language.and  communi- 
cation-language,  p.  115.  ,Totc,m  and  Taboo,  p.  116.  Speech  and  speaking,  p,  117.  The  house  as 
race-expression,  p.  izo.  Castle  and  cathedral,  p.  izz.  Race,  p.  1Z4.  Blood  and  soil,  p.  1Z7. 
Speech,  p.  13 1.  Means  and  meaning,  p.  134.  Word,  grammar,  p.  137.  Language-history,  p.  145. 
Script,  p.  149-  Morphology  of  the  Culture-languages,  p.  1 5Z. 

Chapter  VI.  Cities  and  Peoples.  (G)  Primitives,  Culture-Peoples,  Fella- 
heen , , 157 

People-names,  languages,  races,  p.  159.  Mirations,  p.  161.  People  and  soul,  p.  165.  The 
Persians,  p.  166.  Morphology  of  peoples,  p.  169.  People  and  nation,  p.  170.  Classical,  Arabian, 
and  Western  nations,  p.  173. 

Chapter  VII.  Problems  of  the  - Arabian  Culture.  ' (A)  Historic  Pseudo- 
MORPHOSES  187 

” Pseudomorphosis,”  p.  189,  Actium,  p.  191.  Russia,  p.  191-  Arabian  chivalry,  p.  196. 
Syncretism,  p.  zoo.  Jews,  Chaldeans,  Persians  of  the  prc-Culture,  p.  Z04.  Mission,  p.  Z09. 
Jesus,  p.  ziz.  Paul,  p.  zzo.  John,  Marcion,  p.  ZZ5.  The  pagan  and  Christian  cult-churches, 
p,  zz8. 


CONTENTS 

Chapter  VIIL  Problems  op  the  Arabian  Culture.  (B)  The  Magian 
Soul  ^3  * 

Dualism  of  the  World-cavern,  p.  133.  Time-feeling  (na.,  world-history,  grace),  p.  138. 

Consensus,  p.  2.41,.  The  “Worci*’  as  substance,  the  Koran,  p.  2.44.  Secret  Torah,  coaifncntary, 
p.  x46.  The  group  of  the  Magian  religions,  p.  2.4S.  The  Chfistologicai  controversy,  p.  ajs* 
Being  as  extension  (mission),  p.  ^58. 

.Chapter  IX.  Problems  of  the  Arabian  Culture.  (C)  Pythagoras,  Mo- 
hammed, Cromwell  2.63 

Essence  of  religion,  p.  165.  Myth  and  cult,  p.  a6S.  Moral  as  sacrifice,  p.  271.  Morphology 
: of  religious  history,  p.  275.  The  pre-Cuiture:  Franks,  Russians,  p.  277.  Egyptian  early,  |xriod, 
p.  279.  Classical,  p.  281.  China,  p.  285.  Gothic  (Mary  and  Devil,  bapds,m  and  contrition), 
p.  288.  Reformation,  p.  295.  Science,  p.  300,  Rationalism,  p.  305.  “Second  Reiigious.aess,'' 
p.  310.  Roman  and  Chinese  emperor- worship,  p.  313.  Jewry,  p.  315. 

Chapter  X.  The  State.  (A)  The  Problem  of  the  Estates:  Nobility  and 
Priesthood  315 

Man  and  woman,  p.  317.  Stock  and  estate,  p.  329.  Peasantry  and  society,  p.  3.3.1.  Estate, 
caste,  calling,  p.  332.  Nobility  and  priesthood  as  symbols  of  Time  and  Space,  p.  335.  Training 
and  shaping,  customary-ethic  and  moral,  p.  340.  Property,  power,  and  booty,  p.  343.  Priest 
and  savant,  p.  345.  Economics  and  science,  money  and  intellect,  p.  347.  History  of  the  es- 
tates, early  period,  p.  348.  The  Third  Estate,  City-Freedom,  Bourgeoisie^  p.  354. 

Chapter  XL  The  State.  (B)  State  and  History  359 

Movement  and  thing-moved;  Being  “in  form,"  p,  361.  Right  and  might,  p,  3%.  Estate 
and  State,  p.  366.  The  feudal  State,  p.  371.  From  feudal  union  to  Estate-State,  p.  375.  Pol  is 
and  Dynasty,  p.  376.  The  Absolute  State,  Fronde,  and  Tyrannls,  p.  385.  Wallenstein,  p.  389. 
Cabinet  politics,  p.  391.  From  First  Tyrannis  to  Second,  p.  394.  The  bourgeois  revolution, 
p,  398,  Intellect  and  money,  p.  400-  Formless  powders  (Napoleonism),  p.  404.  Emancipation  of 
money,  p.  410.  “Constitution,”  p.  412.  From  Napoleonism  to  Csesarism  (period  of  the  “Con- 
tending States"),  p.  416.  The  great  wars,  p.  419.  Age  of  the  Romans,  p.  422.  From  Caliphate 
to  Sultanate,  p.  423.  Egypt,  p.  427.  The  present,  p.  428.  Csesarism,  p.  431, 

Chapter  XIL  The  State.  (C)  Philosophy  of  Politics  437 

Life  is  politics,  p.  439.  The  political  instinct,  p.  441.  The  states.man,  p.  442.  Creation  of 
tradition,  p.  444.  Physiognomic  (diplomatic)  pulse,  p.  445.  Estate  and  party,  p.  448.  The 
bourgeoisie  as  primary  party  (liberalism),  p.  449.  From  Estate, . through  party,  to  the  m.agn.atc’s 
..  following,  p.  452.  Theory,  from  Rousseau  to  Marx,  p.  453.  .Intellect  and  money  (democracy), 
p.  455.  The  press,  p.  460.  Self-annihilation  of  democracy  through  money,  p-  464. 

Chapter  XIII.  The  Form-world  of  Economic  Life.  (A)  Money  467 

National  economics,  p.  469.  Political  and  economic  sides  of  life,  p.  471.  Productive  and 
acquisitive  economy  (agriculture  and  trade),  p.  473,'  Politics  and  trade  (power  and  spoil),  p.  475, 
Primitive  economy,  and  economic  style  of  the  high  Cultures,  p.  476.  Estate  and  economic  class, 
p.  477.  The  city  less '.land,  thinking  in  goods,' p.  480.  The  city, , thinking  .in;money,  p.  .481. 
World-economics,  mobiimation  of  goods  by  money,  p.  484.  The  Classical  idea  of  mosey,  the 
coin,  p.  486.  The  slave  as  money,  p.  487.  Faustian  thinking  in  money,  the  book-value,  p.  489. 
Double-entry  book-keeping,  p.  490.  The  coin  in  the  West,  p.  490.  Money  and  work,  p.  491. 
Capitalism,  p.  493.  Economic  organization,  p.  494.  Extinction  of  money-thought;  Diocletian; 
the  economic  thought  of  the  Russian,  p.  495. 


CONTENTS 

Chapter  XIV.  The  Form-worlb  of  Economic  Life.  (B)  The  Ma- 
chine 497 

Spirit  of  technics,  p.  499.  Primitive  technics  and  style  of  the  high  Cultures,  p.  500.  Classical 
technics,  p.  501.  The  wiii-to-power  over  nature,  the  inventor,  p.  501.  Intoxication  of  modern 
discovery,  p.  501.  The  man  as  slave  of  the  machine,  p.  504.  Entrepreneurs,  workers,  engineers, 
p.  504.  Struggle  between  money  and  industry,  p.  505.  Last  battle  of  money  and  politics,  vic- 
tory of  the  blood,  p.  507. 


Index 


FOLLOWS  PAGE  ■ 5O7 


CHAPTER  I 


ORIGIN  AND  LANDSCAPE 


CA) 

THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM 


CHAPTER  I 


ORIGIN  AND  LANDSCAPE 
(A) 

THE  cosmc  AND  THE  MICROCOSM 

Regard  the  flowers  at  eventide  as,  one  after  the  other,  they  dose  in  the  set- 
ting sun.  Strange  is  the  feeling  that  then  presses  in  upon  you  — a feeling  of 
enigmatic  fear  in  the  presence  of  this  blind  dreamlike  earth-bound  existence. 
The  dumb  forest,  the  silent  meadows,  this  bush,  that  twig,  do  not  stir  them- 
selves, it  is  the  wind  that  plays  with  them.  Only  the  little  gnat  is  free  — he 
dances  still  in  the  evening  light,  he  moves  whither  he  will. 

A plant  is  nothing  on  its  own  account.  It  forms  a part  of  the  landscape  in 
which  a chance  made  it  take  root.  The  twilight,  the  chill,  the  closing  of 
every  flower  — these  are  not  cause  and  effect,  not  danger  and  willed  answer  to 
danger.  They  are  a single  process  of  nature,  which  is  accomplishing  itself  near, 
with,  and  in  the  plant.  The  individual  is  not  free  to  look  out  for  itself,  will 
for  itself,  or  choose  for  itself. 

An  animal,  on  the  contrary,  can  choose.  It  is  emancipated  from  the  servitude 
of  all  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  midget  swarm  that  dances  on  and  on,  that 
solitary  bird  still  flying  through  the  evening,  the  fox  approaching  furtively 
the  nest  — these  are  little  worlds  of  their  own  within  another  great  world.  An  animal- 
cule in  a drop  of  water,  too  tiny  to  be  perceived  by  the  human  eye,  though  it 
lasts  but  a second  and  has  but  a corner  of  this  drop  as  its  field  — nevertheless  is 
free  and  independent  in  the  face  of  the  universe.  The  giant  oak,  upon  one  of  whose 
leaves  the  droplet  hangs,  is  notd 

Servitude  and  freedom  — this  is  in  last  and  deepest  analysis  the  differentia 
by  which  we  distinguish  vegetable  and  animal  existence.  Yet  only  the  plant 
is  wholly  and  entirely  what  it  is;  in  the  being  of  the  animal  there  is  something 
dual.  A vegetable  is  only  a vegetable;  an  animal  is  a vegetable  and  something 
more  besides,  A herd  that  huddles  together  trembling  in  the  presence  of  danger, 
a child  that  clings  weeping  to  its  mother,  a man  desperately  striving  to  force  a 
way  into  his  God  — all  these  are  seeking  to  return  out  of  the  life  of  freedom 
into  the  vegetal  servitude  from  which  they  were  emancipated  into  individuality 
and  loneliness. 

The  seeds  of  a flowering  plant  show,  under  the  microscope,  two  sheath- 

^ In  what  follows  I have  drawn  upon  a tnetaphysical  work  that  I hope  shortly  to  be  able  to 
publish.  ■ ■ 


3 


4 THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

leaves  which  form  and  protect  the  young  plant  that  is  presently  to  turn  towards 
the  light,  with  its.  organs  of  the  life-cycle  and  of  reproduction,  and  in  addition 
a third,  which  contains  the  future  root  and  tells  us  that  the  plant  is  destined 
irrevocably  to  become  once  again  part  of  a landscape.  In  the  higher  animals, 
on  the  contrary,  we  observe  that  the  fertilized  egg  forms,  in  the  first  hours  of  its 
individualized  existence,  an  outer  sheath  by  which  the  inner  containers  of  the 
cyclic  and  reproductive  components  — i.c.,  the  plant  element  in  the  animal 
body  — are  enclosed  and  shut  off  from  the  mother  body  and  all  the  rest  ef  the 
world.  This  outer  sheath  symbolizes  the  essential  character  of  animal  existence 
and  distinguishes  the  two  kinds  in  which  the  Living  has  appeared  on  this  earth. 

There  are  noble  names  for  them,  found  and  bequeathed  by  the  Classical 
world.  The  plant  is  something  cosmic,  and  the  animal  is  additionally  a mkro'^ 
cosm  in  relation  to  a macrocosm.  When,  and  not  until,  the  unit  has  thus  separated 
itself  from  the  All  and  can  define  its  position  with  respect  to  the  All,  it  becomes 
thereby  a microcosm.  Even  the  planets  in  their  great  cycles  are  in  servitude, 
and  it  is  only  these  tiny  worlds  that  move  freely  relative  to  a great  one  which 
appears  in  their  consciousness  as  their  world-around  (environment).  Only 
through  this  individualism  of  the  microcosm  does  that  which  the  light  offers 
to  its  eyes  — our  eyes  — acquire  meaning  as  *‘body,”  and  even  to  plants  we 
are  from  some  inner  motive  reluctant  to  concede  the  property  of  bodilincss- 

AIl  that  is  cosmic  bears  the  hall-mark  of  periodicity;  it  has  “beat’’  (rhythm, 
tact).  All  that  is  microcosmic  possesses  polarity;  it  possesses  “tension.” 

We  speak  of  tense  alertness  and  tense  thought,  but  all  wakeful  states  arc  in 
their  essence  tensions.  Sense  and  object,  I and  thou,  cause  and  effect,  thing 
and  property  — each  of  these  is  a tension  between  discretes,  and  when  the 
state  pregnantly  called  detente"  appears,  then  at  once  fatigue,  and  presently 
sleep,  set  in  for  the  microcosmic  side  of  life.  A human  being  asleep,  discharged 
of  all  tensions,  is  leading  only  a plantlike  existence. 

Cosmic  beat,  on  the  other  hand,  is  everything  that  can  be  paraphrased  in 
terms  like  direction,  time,  rhythm,  destiny,  longing  — from  the  hoof-beats  of 
a team  of  thoroughbreds  and  the  deep  tread  of  proud  marching  soldiers  to  the 
silent  fellowship  of  two  lovers,  the  sensed  tact  that  makes  the  dignity  of  a 
social  assembly,  and  that  keen  quick  judgment  of  a “judge  of  men”  which  I 
have  already,  earlier  in  this  work,  ^ called  physiognomic  tact. 

This  beat  of  cosmic  cycles  goes  on  notwithstanding  the  freedom  of  micro- 
cosmic movement  in  space,  and  from  time  to  time  breaks  down  the  tension  of  the 
waking  individual’s  being  into  the  one  grand  felt  harmony.  If  we  have  ever  fol- 
lowed the  flight  of  a bird  in  the  high  air  — how,  always  in  the  same  way,  it 
rises,  turns,  glides,  loses  itself  in  the  distance  — we  must  have  felt  the  plantlike 
certainty  of  the  “it”  and  the  “we”  in  this  ensemble  of  motion,  which  needs 
no  bridge  of  reason  to  unite  your  sense  of  it  with  mine.  This  is  the  meaning 
^ For  instance,  Vol.  I,  p.  154. 


THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM  5 

of  war-daoccs  and  lovc-danccs  amongst  men  and  beasts.  In  this,  wise  a regn 
jnent  mounting  to  the  assault  under  fire  is  forged  into  a unity,  in  this  wise  docs 
the  crowd  collect  at  some  exciting  occasion  and  become  a body,  capable,  of 
th,micing  and  acting  pitifully,  blindly,  and  strangely  for  a moment  ere  it  falls 
apart  again.  In  such  cases  the  microcosmic  wall  is  obliterated.  It  jostles  and 
threatens,  1/  pushes  and  pulls,  it  flees,  swerves,  and  sways.  Limbs  intertwine, 
feet  rush,  m.€  cry  comes  from  every  mouth,  one  destiny  overlies  all.  Out  of  a 
sum  of  little  single  worlds  comes  suddenly  a complete  whole. 

The  perception  of  cosmic  beat  we  call  *‘feel  (Fuhlen)^'*  that  of  microcosmic 
tensions  “feeling  (Emffinden^*'  The  ambiguity  of  the  word  Sinnlkhkeif* 
has  obscured  this  clear  difference  between  the  general  and  plantlike  side  and 
the  specifically  animal  side  of  life.  If  we  say  for  the  one  race-  or  sex-life,  and 
for  the  other  sense-life,  a deep  connexion  reveals  itself  between  them.  The 
former  ever  bears  the  mark  of  periodicity,  beat,  even  to  the  extent  of  harmony 
with  the  great  cycles  of  the  stars,  of  relation  between  female  nature  and  the 
moon,  of  this  life  generally  to  night,  spring,  warmth.  The  latter  consists  in 
tensions,  polarities  of  light  and  object  illuminated,  of  cognition  and  that  which 
is  cognized,  of  wound  and  the  weapon  that  has  caused  it.  Each  of  these  sides  of 
life  has,  in  the  more  highly  developed  genera,  taken  shape  in  special  organs, 
and  the  higher  the  development,  the  clearer  the  emphasis  on  each  side.  Wc 
possess  two  cyclic  organs  of  the  cosmic  existence^  the  blood  system  and  the  sex-organ, 
and  two  differentiating  organs  of  microcosmic  mobility^  senses  and  nerves.  We  have 
to  assume  that  in  its  origin  the  tvhok  body  has  been  both  a cyclic  and  a tactual 
organ.  , 

The  blood  is  for  us  the  symbol  of  the  living.  Its  course  proceeds  without 
pause,  from  generation  to  death,  from  the  mother  body  in  and  out  of  the  body  of 
the  child,  in  the  waking  state  and  in  sleep,  never-ending.  The  blood  of  the 
ancestors  flows  through  the  chain  of  the  generations  and  binds  them  in  a 
great  linkage  of  destiny,  beat,  and  time.  Originally  this  was  accomplished 
only  by  a process  of  division,  redivision,  and  ever  new  division  of  the  cycles, 
until  finally  a specific  organ  of  sexual  generation  appeared  and  made  moment 
into  a symbol  of  duration.  And  how  thereafter  creatures, begat  and  conceived, 
how  the  plantlikc  in  them  drove  them  to  reproduce  themselves  for  the  mainte- 
nance beyond  themselves  of  the  eternal  cycle,  how  the  one  great  pulse-beat 
operates  through  all  the  detached  souls,  filling,  driving,  checking,  and  often 
destroying  — that  is  the  deepest  of  all  life’s  secrets,  the  secret  that  all  reli- 
gious mysteries  and  all  great  poems  seek  to  penetrate,  the  secret  whose  tragedy 
stirred  Goethe  in  his  and  *'  Wahlverwandtschaftenf*  where 

the  child  has  to  die  because,  brought  into  existence  out  of  discordant  cycles  of 
the  blood,  it  is  the  fruit  of  a cosmic  sin. 

To  these  cosmic  organs  the  microcosm  as  such  adds  (in  the  degree  to  which 
it  possesses  freedom  of  movement  the  macrocosm)  the  organ  “sense,” 


6 THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

which  is  originally  tonch-sensc  and  nothing  else.  Even  now,  at  our  .own  high 
level  of  deveiopmcnt,,  we  use  the  word  **  touch'*  quite  generally  of  contacts  hj 
eye,  by  ear,  and  even  by  the  understanding,  for  it  is  the  simplest  expression  of 
the  mobility  of  a living  creature  that  needs  constantly  to  be  establis,Iiing 
its  relation  to,  its  world-around.  But  to  “establish”  here  means  to  fix  flacsy 
and  thus  all  senses,  however  sophisticated  and  remote  from  the  primitive  they 
may  seem,  are  essentially  positive  senses;  there  are  no  others.  Sensation  of  all 
kinds  distinguishes  proper  and  alien.  And  for  the  positional  definition  of  the 
alien  with  respect  to  the  proper  the  scent  of  the  hound  serves  just  as  imich  as  the 
hearing  of  the  stag  and  the  eye  of  the  eagle.  Colour,  brightness,  tones,  odours, 
all  conceivable  modes  of  sensation,  imply  detachment,  distance,  extension. 

Like  the  cosmic  cycle  of  the  blood,  the  differentiating  activity  of  sense  is 
originally  a unity.  The  active  sense  is  always  an  understanding  sense  also. 
In  these  simple  relations  seeking  and  finding  are  one  - — that  which  we  most  ap- 
positely call  “ touch.”  It  is  only  later,  in  a stage  wherein  considerable  demands 
are  made  upon  developed  senses,  that  sensation  and  understanding  of  sensation 
cease  to  be  identical  and  the  latter  begins  to  detach  itself  more  and  more  clearly 
from  the  former.  In  the  outer  sheath  the  critical  organ  separates  itself  from  the 
sense-organ  (as  the  sex-organ  does  from  that  of  blood-circulation).  But  our 
use  of  words  like  “keen,”  “sensitive,”  “insight,”  “poking  our  nose,’*  and 
“flair,”  not  to  mention  the  terminology  of  logic,  all  taken  from  the  visual 
world,  shows  well  enough  that  we  regard  all  understanding  as  derived  from  sen- 
sation, and  that  even  in  the  case  of  man  the  two  still  work  hand  in  hand. 

We  see  a dog  lying  indifferent  and  then  in  a moment  tense,  listening,  and 
scenting  — what  he  merely  senses  he  is  seeking  to  understand  as  wcil.  He  is 
able,  too,  to  reflect  — that  is  a state  m which  the  understanding  is  almost  alone 
at  work  and  playing  upon  mat  sensations.  The  older  languages  very  clearly  ex- 
pressed this  graduation,  sharply  distinguishing  each  degree  as  an  activity  of  a 
specific  kind  by  means  of  a specific  label  — e.g.,  hear,  listen,  listen  for  Qau-^ 
schen};  smell,  scent,  sniff;  see,  spy,  observe.  In  such  series  as  these  thereason- 
content  becomes  more  and  more  important  relative  to  the  sensation-conteiit. 

Finally,  however,  a supreme  sense  develops  among  the  rest.  A something  in 
the  All,  which  for  ever  remains  inaccessible  to  our  will-to-understand, 
evokes  for  itself  a bodily  organ.  The  eye  comes  into  existence  — and  in  and  with 
the  eye,  as  its  opposite  pole,  light.  Abstract  thinking  about  light  may  lead  (and 
has  led)  to  an  ideal  light  representable  by  an  ensemble  picture  of  waves  and  rays, 
but  the  significance  of  this  development  in  actuality  was  that  thenceforward 
life  was  embraced  and  taken  in  through  the  light-world  of  the.ej^t.  This  is  the  su- 
preme marvel  that  makes  everything  human  what  it  is.  Only  with  this  light- 
world  of  the  eye  do  distances  come  into  being  as  colours  and  brightnesses; 
only  in  this  world  are  night  and  day  and  things  and  motions  visible  in  the  ex- 
tension of  illumined  space,  and  the  universe  of  infinitely  remote  stars  circling 


THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM  7 

above  the  earth j and  that  light-horizon  of  the  individual  life  which  stretches 
so  far  beyond  the  environs  of  the  body. 

In  the  world  of  this  light  — not  the  light  which  science  has  deduced  in- 
directly by  the  aid  of  iiiental  concepts,  themselves  derived  from  visions  (“  theory*’ 
in  the  Greek  sense)  — it  comes  to  pass  that  seeing,  human  herds  wander  upon 
the  face  of  this  little  earth-star,  and  that  circumstances  of  light  — the  full 
southern  flood  over  Egypt  and  Mexico,  the  greyness  of  the  north  — contribute 
to  the  determination  of  their  entire  life.  It  is  for  his  eye  that  man  develops  the 
magic  of  his  architecture,  wherein  the  constructional  elements  given  by  touch 
are  restated  in  relations  generated  by  light.  Religion,  art,  thought,  have  all 
arisen  for  light’s  sake,  and  all  differentiations  reduce  to  the  one  point  of  whether 
it  is  the  bodily  eye  or  the  mind’s  eye  that  is  addressed. 

And  with  this  there  emerges  in  ail  clarity  yet  another  distinction,  which  is 
normally  obscured  by  the  use  of  the  ambiguous  word  “consciousness  (^Bewusst- 
sem').''*  I distinguish  being  or  “being  there”  (Dasein)  from  waking-being 
or  waking-consciousness  (Wachsein)}  Being  possesses  beat  and  direction, 
while  w^aking-consciousness  is  tension  and  extension.  In  being  a destiny  rules, 
while  waking-consciousness  distinguishes  causes  and  effects.  The  prime  ques- 
tion is  for  the  one  “when  and  wherefore?”  for  the  other  “where  and  how?” 

A plant  leads  an  existence  that  is  without  waking-consciousness.  In  sleep 
all  creatures  become  plants,  the  tension  of  polarity  to  the  world-around  is 
extinguished,  and  the  beat  of  life  goes  on.  A plant  knows  only  a relation  to  the 
when  and  the  wherefore.  The  upthrust  of  the  first  green  shoots  out  of  the 
wintry  earth,  the  swelling  of  the  buds,  the  whole  mighty  process  of  blooming, 
scent,  colour  glory,  and  ripening  — all  this  is  desire  to  fulfil  a destiny,  constant 
yearning  towards  a “when?” 

“Where?”  on  the  other  hand  can  have  no  meaning  for  a plant  existence.  It 
is  the  question  with  which  awakening  man  daily  orients  himself  afresh  with 
respect  to  the  world.  For  it  is  only  the  pulse-beat  of  Being  that  endures  through- 
out the  generations,  whereas  waking-consciousness  begins  anew  for  each  micro- 
cosm. And  herein  lies  the  distinction  between  procreation  and  birth,  the  first 
being  a pledge  of  duration,  the  second  a beginning.  A plant,  therefore,  is  bred, 
but  it  is  not  born.  It  “is  there,”  but  no  awakening,  no  birthday,  expands  a 
sense-world  around  it. 

II  ■ ■ 

With  this  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  man.  In  man’s  waking-conscious- 
ness nothing  disturbs  the  now  pure  lordship  of  the  eye.  The  sounds  of  the  night, 
the  wind,  the  panting  of  beasts,  the  odour  of  flowers,  all  stimulate  in  him  a 
“ whither  ' and  a “ whence*'  in  the  wGrld  of  light.  Of  the  world  of  scent,  in  which 
even  our  closest  comrade  the  dog  still  co-ordinates  his  visual  impressions,  we 

^ Sec  Vol.  I,  p.  54.  — Tn 


8 THE  DECLINE  OF  THE'  WEST 

have  no  conception  whatever.  We  know  nothing  of  the  world  of  the  butterflv, 
whose  crystalline  eye  projects  no  synthetic  picture,  or  of  those  animals  which, 
while  certainly  not  destitute  of  senses,  are  blind.  The  only  space  that  remams  to 
m is  pisml  space,  and  in  it  places  have  been  found  for  the  relics  of  other  sense- 
worlds  (such  as  sounds,  scents,  heat  and  cold)  as  properties  and  effects  of  Ugh- 
things  — it  is  a seen  fire  that  warmth  comes  from,  it  is  a seen  rose  in  illumined 
space  that  gives  off  the  scent  and  we  speak  of  a certain  tone  as  violin-tone.  As  to 
the  stars,  our  conscious  relations  with  them  are  limited  to  seeing  them  — o%^er 
our  heads  they  shine,  describing  their  visible  path.'^  But  of  these  sense-worlds 
there  is  no  doubt  that  animals  and  even  primitive  men  still  have  sensations  that 
are  wholly  different  from  ours;  some  of  these  sensations  we  are  able  to  figure 
to  ourselves  indirectly  by  the  aid  of  scientific  hypotheses,  but  the  rest  now  escape 
us  altogether. 

This  impoverishment  of  the  sensual  implies,  how^ever,  an  immeasurable 
deepening.  Human  waking-consciousness  is  no  longer  a mere  tension  between 
body  and  environment.  It  is  now  life  in  a self-contained  light-world.  The  body 
moves  in  the  space  that  is  seen.  The  depth-experience  ^ is  a mighty  out-thrust 
into  the  visible  distance  from  a light-centre  ® — the  point  which  we  call 
‘‘F*  is  a light-concept.  From  this  point  onward  the  life  of  an  ‘H’*  becomes 
essentially  a life  in  the  sun,  and  night  is  akin  to  death.  And  out  of  it,  too, 
there  arises  a new  feeling  of  fear  which  absorbs  all  others  within  itself  — 
feat  before  the  invisible,  feat  of  that  which  one  hears  or  feels,  suspects,  or  observes 
in  its  effects  without  seeing.  Animals  indeed  experience  fear  in  other  forms, 
but  man  finds  these  forms  puzzling,  and  even  uneasiness  in  the  presence  of  still- 
ness to  which  primitive  men  and  children  are  subject  (and  which  they  seek 
to  dispel  by  noise  and  loud  talking)  is  disappearing  in  the  higher  types  of  man- 
kind. It  is  fear  of  the  invisible  that  is  the  essence  and  hall-mark  of  hiinian 
religiousness.  Gods  are  surmised,  imagined,  envisaged  light-actualities,  and 
the  idea  of  an  “ invisible'*  god  is  the  highest  expression  of  human  transcendence. 
Where  the  bounds  of  the  light-world  are,  there  lies  the  beyond,  and  salvation 
is  emancipation  from  the  spell  of  the  light-world  and  its  facts. 

In  precisely  this  resides  the  ineffable  charm  and  the  very  real  power  of  ciiian- 
cipation  that  music  possesses  for  us  men.  For  music  is  the  only  art  whose  means 
lie  outside  the  light-world  that  has  so  long  become  coextensive  with  our  total 
world,  and  music  alone,  therefore,  can  take  us  right  out  of  this  world,  break 
up  the  steely  tyranny  of  light,  and  let  us  fondly  imagine  that  we  are  on  the  verge 
of  reaching  the  souFs  final  secret  — an  illusion  due  to  the  fact  that  our  waking 
consciousness  is  now  so  dominated  by  one  sense  only,  so  thoroughly  adapted 

^ Even  scientific  astronomy,  wEen  applied  to  everyday  work,  states  the  movements  of  the  heav- 
enly bodies  in  terms  referred  to  our^pcrccption  of  them. — Tf, 

■'  ® 'See'VoL  X, p,  ijx. — 'Tf.; 

3 A very  similar  notion  of  the  light-world  diffused  from  the  light-centrc  forms  the  cardinal  point 
of  the  philosophy  of  Robert  GrossetcstCs  Bishop  of  Lincoln  (1175-1x73),  — Tr. 


9 


THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM 

to  tile  eye-world,  that  it  is  incapable  of  forming,  out  of  the  impressions  it  re- 
ceives,, a world  of  the  ear.  ^ '■ 

Man's  t,IiougIit,  tlien,  is  visual  thought,  our  concepts  are  derived  from  .vision, 
and  the  \»vhole  fabric  of  our  logic  is  a light-world  in  the  imagination. 

This  narrowing  and  consequent  deepening,  which  has  led  to  all  our  sense- 
impressions  being  adapted  to  and  ordered  with  those  of  sight,  has  led  also  to 
the  replacement  of  the  innumerable  methods  of  thought-communication  known 
to  animals  by  the  one  single  medium  of  language,  which  is  a bridge  in  the  light- 
toofld  between  two  persons  present  to  one  another’s  bodily  or  imaginative  eyes. 
The  other  modes  of  speaking  of  which  vestiges  remain  at  all  have  long  been 
absorbed  into  language  in  the  form  of  mimicry,  gesture,  or  emphasis.  The 
difference  between  purely  human  speech  and  general  animal  utterance  is  that 
words  and  word-linkages  constitute  a domain  of  inward  light-ideas,  which 
has  been  built  up  under  the  sovereignty  of  the  eyes.  Every  word-meaning  has 
a light- value,  even  in  the  case  of  words  like  “melody,”  “taste,”  “cold,”  or  of 
perfectly  abstract  designations. 

Even  among  the  higher  animals,  the  habit  of  reciprocal  understanding  by 
means  of  a sense-link  has  brought  about  a marked  difference  between  mere 
sensation  and  mderstanding  sensation.  If  we  distinguish  in  this  wise  sense- 
imfressions  and  sense-judgments  (e.g.,  scent-judgment,  taste-judgment,  or  aural- 
judgment),  we  find  that  very  often,  even  in  ants  and  bees,  let  alone  birds  of 
prey,  horses,  and  dogs,  the  centre  of  gravity  has  palpably  shifted  towards  the 
judgment  side  of  waking-being.  But  it  is  only  under  the  influence  of  language 
that  there  is  set  up  within  the  waking-consciousness  a definite  opposition  between 
sensation  and  understanding,  a tension  that  in  animals  is  quite  unthinkable 
and  even  in  man  can  hardly  have  been  at  first  anything  more  than  a rarely 
actualized  possibility.  The  development  of  language,  then,  brought  along 
with  it  a determination  of  fundamental  significance  — the  emancipation  of  under- 
standing  from  sensation. 

More  and  more  often  there  appears,  in  lieu  of  the  simple  comprehension  of 
the  gross  intake,  a comprehension  of  the  significances  of  the  component  sense- 
impressions,  which  have  hardly  been  noticed  as  such  before.^  Finally  these 
impressions  themselves  are  discarded  and  replaced  by  the  felt  connotations  of 
familiar  word-sounds.  The  word,  originally  the  name  of  a visual  thing,  changes 
imperceptibly  into  the  label  of  a mental  thing,  the  “concept.”  We  are  far  from 
being  able  to  fix  exact  meanings  to  such  names  — that  we  can  do  only  with 
wholly  new  names.  We  never  use  a word  twice  with  identical  connotation, 
and  no  one  ever  understands  exactly  as  another  does.  But  mutual  comprehen- 

^ The  coming  of  radio  broadcasting  has  in  no  way  akcred,  bnt  has  rather  confirmed,  the  validity 
of  this.  The  iistener  either  translates  his  anral  impressions  into  those  of  the  light-world  or  else 
yields  even  more  readily  than  nsnal  to  the  “illusion"  here  discussed.  — Tr. 

^ The  original  reads:  **An  Sulk  des  mlUg  unhdtlkhm  mfsuhmdm  Empfindens  mcheint  oft  und  offer 
ein  VsrsUhsn  der  Bsdeutung  von  hium  noch  btmhuun  Sinneseindruchsnf*  — Tr. 


•10; 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

sion  is  possible,,  in  spite  of  this,  because  of  the  couimou  world-outlook  that  has 
been  induced  in  both,  with  and  by  the  use  of  a common  language;  in  an  ambiance 
common  to  the  lives  and  activities  of  both,  mere  word-sounds  suffice  to  evoke 
cognate  ideas.  It  is  this  mode  of  comprehending  by  means  of  sounds  at  once 
derived  and  detached  (abstract)  from  actual  seeing  which,  however  rarely  we 
can  find  it  definitely  evidenced  at  the  primitive  level,  does  in  fact  sharply  sepa- 
rate the  generic-animal  kind  of  waking-consciousness  from  the  purely  human 
kind  which  supervenes.  Just  so,  at  an  earlier  stage,  the  appearance  of  vraking- 
consciousness  as  such  fixed  a frontier  between  the  general  piantlike  and  the 
specifically  animal  existence. 

Understanding  detached  from  sensation  is  called  thoughts  Thought  has  introduced 
a permanent  disunity  into  the  human  waking-consciousness.  From  early  times 
it  has  rated  understanding  and  sensibility  as  “ higher*  ’ and  “ lower*  * soul-powcr. 
It  has  created  the  fateful  opposition  between  the  light-world  of  the  eye,  de- 
scribed as  a figment  and  an  illusion,  and  the  world-imagined  mrgestelltef^  **set 
before**  oneself),  in  which  the  concepts,  with  their  faint  but  ineffaceable  tinge 
of  light-coloration,  live  and  do  business.  And  henceforth  for  man,  so  long  as 
he  "‘thinks,*’  this  is  the  true  world,  the  world-in-itself.  At  the  outset  the  ego 
was  waking-being  as  such  (in  so  far,  that  is,  as,  having  sight,  it  felt  itself  as 
the  centre  of  a light-world);  now  it  becomes  ""spirit**  — namely,  pure  under- 
standing, which  ‘"cognises”  itself  as  such  and  very  soon  comes  to  regard  not 
only  the  world  around  itself,  but  even  the  remaining  component  of  life,  its  own 
body,  as  qualitatively  below  itself.  This  is  evidenced  not  only  in  the  upright 
carriage  of  man,  but  in  the  thoroughly  intellectualmed  formation  of  his  head, 
in  which  the  eyes,  the  brow,  and  the  temples  become  more  and  more  the  vehicles 
of  expression.^ 

Clearly,  then,  thought,  when  it  became  independent,  discovered  a new  mode 
of  activity  for  itself.  To  the  practical  thought  which  is  directed  upon  the  con- 
stitution of  the  light-things  in  the  world-around,  with  reference  to  this  or 
that  practical  end,  there  is  added  the  theoretical,  penetrating,  subtilizing 
thought  which  sets  itself  to  establish  the  constitution  of  these  things  ""in 
themselves,”  the  natura  rerum.  From  that  which  is  seen,  the  light  is  abstracted, 
the  depth-experience  of  the  eye  intensifies  itself  in  a grand  and  unmistakable 
course  of  development  into  a depth-experience  within  the  tinted  realm  of  word- 
connotations,  Man  begins  to  believe  that  it  is  not  impossible  for  his  inner  eye 
to  see  right  through  into  the  things  that  actually  are.  Concept  follows  upon  con- 
cept, and  at  last  there  is  a mighty  thought-architecture  made  up  of  buildings 
that  stand  out  with  full  clarity  under  the  inner  light. 

The  development  of  theoretical  thought  within  the  human  waking-con- 
sciousness gives  rise  to  a kind  of  activity  that  makes  inevitable  a fresh  conflict — 

^ Hence  we  call  that  which  we  observe in  the  faces  of  men  who  have  not  the  habit  of  thought 
** animal’*  — admiringly  or  contemptuously  as  the  case  may  be. 


II 


THE,  COSMIC  AND  ' THE  MICROCOSM 

that  between  Being  (existence)  and  Waking-Being  (waking-consciousness). 
The  animal  microcosm,  in  which  existence  and  consciousness  .are  joined  in^a 
self-evident  unity  of  living,  knows  of.  consciousness  only  as  fh  servant  oi  exis- 
tcnce.  The  animal  ‘‘lives  * * simply  and  does  not  reflect  upon  life.  Owing,  how- 
ever, to  the  unconditional  monarchy  of  the  eye,  life  is  presented,  as  the  life  of  a 
visible  entity  in  the  light;  understanding,  then,  when  it  becomes  interlocked 
with  speech,  promptly  forms  a concep  of  thought  and  with  it  a comter-cmcep  ^ 
of  life,  and  in  the  end  it  distinguishes  life  as  it  is  from  that  which  might  be. 
Instead  of  straight,  uncomplicated  living,  we  have  the  antithesis  represented 
in  the  phrase  “thought  and  action.’*  That  which  is  not  possible  at  ail  in  the 
beasts  becomes  in  every  man  not  merely  a possibility,  but  a fact  and  in  the  end 
an  alternative.  The  entire  history  of  mature  humanity  with  all  its  phenomena 
has  been  formed  by  it,  and  the  higher  the  form  that  a Culture  takes,  the  more 
fully  this  opposition  dominates  the  significant  moments  of  its  conscious  being. 

The  plantlike-cosmic.  Being  heavy  with  Destiny,  blood,  sex,  possess  an 
immemorial  mastery  and  keep  it.  They  are  life.  The  other  only  serves  life. 
But  this  other  wills,  not  to  serve,  but  to  rule;  moreover,  it  believes  that  it  does 
rule,  for  one  of  the  most  determined  claims  put  forward  by  the  human  spirit 
is  its  claim  to  possess  power  over  the  body,  over  “nature.”  But  the  question 
is:  Is  not  this  very  belief  a service  to  life?  Why  does  our  thought  think  just 
so?  Perhaps  because  the  cosmic,  the  “it,”  wills  that  it  shall?  Thought  shows 
off  its  power  when  it  calls  the  body  a notion,  when  it  establishes  the  pitifulness 
of  the  body  and  commands  the  voices  of  the  blood  to  be  silent.  But  in  truth 
the  blood  rules,  in  that  silently  it  commands  the  activity  of  thought  to  begin 
and  to  cease.  There,  too,  is  a distinction  between  speech  and  life  — Being  can 
do  without  consciousness  and  the  life  of  understanding,  but  not  vice  versa. 
Thought  rules,  after  all,  in  spite  of  all,  only  in  the  “realm  of  thought.” 

Ill 

It  only  amounts  to  a verbal  difference  whether  we  say  that  thought  is  a 
creation  of  man,  or  higher  mankind  a creation  of  thought.  But  thought  it- 
self persistently  credits  itself  with  much  too  high  a rank  in  the  ensemble  of  life, 
and  through  its  ignorance  of , or  indifference  to,  the  fact  that  there  are  other 
modes  of  ascertainment  besides  itself,  forfeits  its  opportunity  of  surveying  the 
whole  without  prejudice.  In  truth,  all  professors  of  thought  — and  in  every 
Culture  they  have  been  almost  the  only  authorized  spokesmen  — have  taken 
it  as  self-evident  that  cold  abstract  thought  is  the  way  of  approach  to  “last 
things . ’ ’ Moreover,  they  have  assumed,  also  as  self-evident,  that  the  “ truth 
which  they  reach  on  this  line  of  adva:nce  is  the  same  as  the  truth  which  they 
have  set  before  themselves  as  an  aim,  and  not,  as  it  really  is,  a sort  of  imaginary 
picture  which  takes  the  place  of  the  unknowable  secrets. 

1 See  YoL  I,  p.  116.  Tf. 


IZ 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

For,  althongli  mm  is  a thinking  being,  it  is  very  far  from  the  fact  that  his 
being  consists  in  thinking.  This  is  a difference  that  the  born  subtilixer  fails  to 
grasp.  The  aim  of  thought  is  called  “truth/*  and  truths  arc  “established**  — 
i.e.,  brought  out  of  the  living  impalpability  of  the  light-world  into  the  form 
of  concepts  and  assigned  permanently  to  places  in  a system,  which  means  a 
kind  of  intellectual  space.  Truths  are  absolute  and  eternal  — i.e.,  they  have 
nothing  more  to  do  with  life. 

But  for  an  animal,  not  truths,  but  only  facts  exist.  Here  is  the  difFerence 
between  practical  and  theoretical  understanding.  Facts  and  truths  ^ differ  as 
time  and  space,  destiny  and  causality.  A fact  addresses  itself  to  the  whole 
waking-consciousness,  for  the  service  of  being,  and  not  to  that  side  of  the  wak- 
ing-consciousness which  imagines  it  can  detach  itself  from  being.  Actual  life, 
history,  knows  only  facts;  life  experience  and  knowledge  of  men  deal  only 
in  facts.  The  active  man  who  does  and  wills  and  fights,  daily  measuring  him- 
self against  the  power  of  facts,  looks  down  upon  mere  truths  as  unimportant. 
The  real  statesman  knows  only  political  facts,  not  political  truths.  Pilate’s 
famous  question  is  that  of  every  man  of  fact. 

It  is  one  of  the  greatest  achievements  of  Nietzsche  that  he  confronted  science 
with  the  problem  of  the  mhe  of  truth  and  knowledge  — cheap  and  even  blas- 
phemous though  this  seems  to  the  boro  thinker  and  savant,  who  regards  his 
whole  d'etre  as  impugned  by  it.  Descartes  meant  to  doubt  everything, 
but  certainly  not  the  value  of  his  doubting. 

It  is  one  thing,  however,  to  pose  problems  and  quite  another  to  believe  in 
solutions  of  them.  The  plant  lives  and  knows  not  that  it  lives.  The  animal 
lives  and  knows  that  it  lives.  Man  is  astounded  by  his  life  and  asks  questions 
about  it.  But  even  man  cannot  give  an  answer  to  his  own  questions,  he  can 
only  believe  in  the  correctness  of  his  answer,  and  in  that  respect  there  is  no 
difference  between  Aristotle  and  the  meanest  savage. 

Whence  comes  it,  then,  that  secrets  must  be  unravelled  and  questions  an- 
swered? Is  it  not  from  that  fear  which  looks  out  of  even  a child’s  eyes,  that 
terrible  dowry  of  human  waking-consciousness  which  compels  the  understand- 
ing, free  now  from  sensation  and  brooding  on  images,  to  probe  into  every  deep 
for  solutions  that  mean  release?  Can  a desperate  faith  in  knowledge  free  us 
from  the  nightmare  of  the  grand  questions? 

“Shuddering  awe  is  mankind’s  noblest  part.”  He  to  whom  that  gift  has 
been  denied  by  fate  must  seek  to  discover  secrets,  to  attack,  dissect,  and  destroy 
the  awe-inspiring,  and  to  extract  a booty  of  knowledge  therefrom.  The  will- 
to-system  is  a will  to  kill  something  living,  to  “establish,”  stabilize,  stiffen  it, 
to  bind  it  in  the  train  of  logic.  The  intellect  has  corquered  when  it  has  com- 
pleted the  business  of  making  rigid. 

This  distinction  that  is  usually  drawn  between  “reason”  (Vemmft)  and 
^ See  ¥oL  2,  p.  loz.  — Tf. 


THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM  13 

“understanding**  is  really  that  between  the  divination  and  flair 

belonging  to  our  plant  side,  which  merely  makes  use  of  the  language  of  eye 
and  word,  and  the  understanding  proper,  belonging  to  our  animal  side,  which 
is  deduced  from  hngnage.  “Reason**  in  this  sense  is  that  which  calls  ideas 
into  life,  “understanding**  that  which  finds  truths.  Truths  are  lifeless  and  can 
be  imparted  (mitgeteili);  ideas  belong  to  the  living  self  of  the  author  and  can 
only  be  sympathetically  evoked  (mitgefuhli).  Understanding  is  essentially 
critical,  “reason**  essentially  creative.^  The  latter  begets  the  object  of  its 
activity,  the  former  starts  from  it.  In  fact,  understanding  criticism  is  first 
practised  and  developed  in  association  with  ordinary  sensations  — it  is  in 
sensation-judgments  that  the  child  learns  to  comprehend  and  to  difFerentiate. 
Then,  abstracted  from  this  connexion  and  henceforward  busied  with  itself, 
criticism  needs  a substitute  for  the  sensation-activity  that  had  previously 
served  as  its  object.  And  this  cannot  be  given  it  but  by  an  already  existing  mode 
of  thought,  and  it  is  upon  this  that  criticism  now  works.  This,  only  this, 
and  not  something  building  freely  on  nothingness,  is  Thought. 

For  quite  early,  before  he  has  begun  to  think  abstractly,  primitive  man 
forms  for  himself  a religious  world-picture,  and  this  is  the  object  upon  which 
the  understanding  begins  to  operate  critically.  Always  science  has  grown 
up  on  a religion  and  under  all  the  spiritual  prepossessions  of  that  religion,  and 
always  it  signifies  nothing  more  or  less  than  an  abstract  melioration  of  these 
doctrines,  considered  as  false  because  less  abstract.  Always  it  carries  along 
the  kernel  of  a religion  in  its  ensemble  of  principles,  problem-enunciations, 
and  methods.  Every  new  truth  that  the  understanding  finds  is  nothing  but  a 
critical  judgment  upon  some  other  that  was  already  there.  The  polarity  be- 
tween old  and  new  knowledge  involves  the  consequence  that  in  the  world  of 
the  understanding  there  is  only  the  relatively  correct  — namely,  judgments  of 
greater  convincingness  than  other  judgments.  Critical  knowledge  rests  upon 
the  belief  that  the  understanding  of  to-day  is  better  than  that  of  yesterday. 
And  that  which  forces  us  to  this  belief,  is  again,  life. 

Can  criticism  then,  as  criticism,  solve  the  great  questions,  or  can  it  merely 
pose  them?  At  the  beginning  of  knowledge  we  believe  the  former.  But  the 
more  we  know,  the  more  certain  we  become  of  the  latter.  So  long  as  we  hope, 
we  call  the  secret  a problem. 

Thus,  for  mankind  aware,  there  is  a double  problem,  that  of  Waking- 
Being  and  that  of  Being;  or  of  Space  and  of  Time;  or  of  the  world-as-nature^ 
and  the  world  as  history;  or  of  pulse  and  tension.  The  waking  consciousnes 
seeks  to  understand  not  only  itself,  but  in  addition  something  that  is  akin  to 
itself.  Though  an  inner  voice  may  tell  one  that  here  all  possibilities  of  knowl- 

^ Hence  Bayle’s  profound  observation  that  the  understanding  is  capable  only  of  discovering 
errors. 

2 See  VoL  I,  p.  94.  — Tr. 


14  THE  DECLINE  OF,  THE  WEST 

edge  are  left  behind,  yet,  in  spite  of  it,  fear  overpersuades  — everyone  — and 
one  .goes  on  with  the  search,  preferring  even  the  pretence  of  a solntion  to  the 
alternative  of  looking  into  nothingness. 

IV 

Waking-consciousness  consists  of  sensation  and  understanding,  and  their 
common  essence  is  a continuous  self-adjustment  in  relation  to  the  macrocosm. 
To  that  extent  waking-consciousness  is  identical  with  ascertainment 
r/eto),  whether  we  consider  the  touch  of  an  infusorian,  or  human  thinking 
of  the  highest  order.  Feeling,  now,  for  touch  with  itself  in  this  wise,  the 
waking-consciousness  first  encounters  the  epistemological  problem.  What  do 
we  mean  by  cognition,  or  by  the  knowledge  of  cognition?  And  what  is  the 
relation  between  the  original  meanings  of  these  terms  and  their  later  formula- 
tions in  words?  Waking  and  sleep  alternate,  like  day  and  night,  according  to 
the  course  of  the  stars,  and  so,  too,  cognition  alternates  with  dreams.  How  do 
these  two  differ? 

Waking-consciousness,  however  — whether  it  be  that  of  sensation  or  that 
of  understanding  — is  synonymous  with  the  existence  of  oppositions,  such  as 
that  between  cognition  and  the  object  cognized,  or  thing  and  property,  or 
object  and  event.  Wherein  consists  the  essence  of  these  oppositions?  And  so 
arises  the  second  problem,  that  of  causality.  When  we  give  the  names  “cause** 
and  “effect**  to  a pair  of  sensuous  elements,  or  “premiss**  and  “consequence** 
to  a pair  of  intellectual  elements,  we  are  fixing  between  them  a relation  of 
power  and  rank  — when  one  is  there,  the  other  must  be  there  also.  In  these 
relations,  observe,  time  does  not  figure  at  all.  We  are  concerned  not  with 
facts  of  destiny,  but  with  causal  truths,  not  with  a “When?**  but  with  a law- 
fixed  dependence.  Beyond  doubt  this  is  the  understanding*s  most  promising 
line  of  activity.  Mankind  perhaps  owes  to  discoveries  of  this  order  his  hap- 
piest moments;  and  thus  he  proceeds,  from  these  oppositions  in  the  near  and 
present  things  of  everyday  life  that  strike  him  immediately,  forward  in  an 
endless  series  of  conclusions  to  the  first  and  final  causes  in  the  structure  of  nature 
that  he  calls  God  and  the  meaning  of  the  world.  He  assembles,  orders,  and 
reviews  his  system,  his  dogma  of  law-governed  connexions,  and  he  finds  in  it 
a refuge  from  the  unforeseen.  He  who  can  demonstrate,  fears  no  longer.  But 
wherein  consists  the  essence  of  causality?  Does  it  lie  in  knowing,  in  the 
known,  or  in  a unity  of  both? 

The  world  of  tensions  is  necessarily  in  itself  stiff  and  dead  — namely, 
“eternal  truth,**  something  beyond  all  time,  something  that  is  a state.  The 
actual  world  of  waking-consciousness,  however,  is  full  of  changes.  This 
does  not  astonish  an  animal  in  the  least,  but  it  leaves  the  thought  of  the  thinker 
powerless,  for  rest  and  movement,  duration  and  change,  become  and  becoming,^ 
^ See  Voi.  I,  pp.  53,  ct  seq.  — Tn 


THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM 


15 

arc  oppositions  denoting  something  that  in  its  very  nature  “passeth  all  under- 
standing” md  mmf  therefore  (from  the  point  of  view  of  the  understanding) 
contain  an  absurdity.  For  is  that  a fact  at  all  which  proves  to  be  incapable  of 
distillation  from  the  sense-world  in  the  form  of  a truth?  On  the  other  hand, 
though  the  world  is  cognized  as  timeless,  a time  element  nevertheless  adheres 
to  it  — tensions  appear  as  beat,  and  direction  associates  itself  with  extension. 
And  so  all  that  is  problematical  for  the  understanding  consciousness  somehow 
gathers  itself  together  in  one  last  and  gravest  problem,  the  pwMem  of  motion. 
And  on  that  problem  free  and  abstract  thought  breaks  down,  and  we  begin 
to  discern  that  the  microcosmic  is  after  all  as  dependent  as  ever  upon  the 
cosmic,  just  as  the  individualness  of  a being  from  its  first  moment  is  consti- 
tuted not  by  a body,  but  by  the  sheath  of  a body.  Life  can  exist  without 
thought,  but  thought  is  only  one  mode  of  life.  High  as  may  be  the  objectives 
that  thought  sets  before  itself,  in  actuality  life  makes  use  of  thought  for  its 
ends  and  gives  it  a living  objective  quite  apart  from  the  solution  of  abstract 
problems.  For  thought  the  solutions  of  problems  are  correct  or  erroneous  - — 
for  life  they  are  valuable  or  valueless,  and  if  the  will-to-know  breaks  down 
on  the  motion  problem,  it  may  well  be  because  life’s  purpose  has  at  that  point 
been  achieved.  In  spite  of  this,  and  indeed  because  of  this,  the  motion  problem 
remains  the  centre  of  gravity  of  all  higher  thought.  All  mythology  and  all 
natural  science  has  arisen  out  of  man’s  wonder  in  the  presence  of  the  mystery 
of  motion. 

The  problem  of  motion  touches,  at  once  and  immediately,  the  secrets  of 
existence,  which  are  alien  to  the  waking-consciousness  and  yet  inexorably 
press  upon  it.  In  posing  motion  as  a problem  we  affirm  our  will  to  compre- 
hend the  incomprehensible,  the  when  and  wherefore.  Destiny,  blood,  all  that 
our  intuitive  processes  touch  in  our  depths.  Born  to  sec,  we  strive  to  set  it 
before  our  eyes  in  the  light,  so  that  we  may  in  the  literal  sense  grasp  it,  assure 
ourselves  of  it  as  of  something  tangible. 

For  this  is  the  decisive  fact,  of  which  the  observer  is  unconscious  — his 
whole  effort  of  seeking  is  aimed  not  at  life,  but  at  the  seeing  of  life,  and  not  at 
death,  but  at  the  seeing  of  death.  We  try  to  grasp  the  cosmic  as  it  appears 
in  the  macrocosm  to  the  microscosm,  as  the  life  of  a body  in  the  light-world  be- 
tween birth  and  death,  generation  and  dissolution,  and  with  that  differenti- 
ation of  body  and  soul  that  follows  of  deepest  necessity  from  our  ability  to 
experience  ^ the  inward-proper  as  a sensuous  alien. 

That  we  do  not  merely  live  but  know  about  “living”  is  a consequence  of 
our  bodily  existence  in  the  light.  But  the  beast  knows  only  life,  not  death. 
Were  we  pure  plantlike  beings,  we  should  die  unconscious  of  dying,  for  to 
feel  death  and  to  die  would  be  identical.  But  animals,  even  though  they  hear 
the  death-cry,  see  the  dead  body,  and  scent  putrefaction,  behold  death  with- 
^ Original:  ms  dem  Ethhnisl*  ’—  Tr. 


i6  \ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

out .compfeliending  it.,  .Only  when  understanding  has.  become^  ^ through  lan- 
guage, detached  from  visual  awareness  and  pure,  does  death  appear  to  man  as 
the  great  enigma  of  the  light-world  about  him. 

Then,  and  only  then,  life  becomes  the  short  span  of  time  between  birth 
and  death,  and  it  is  in  relation  to  death  that  that  other  great  mystery  of  gen- 
eration arises  also.  Only  then  does  the  diffuse  animal  fear  of  everything  become 
the  definite  human  fear  of  death.  It  is  this  thzt  m,akes  the  love  of  man  .and 
woman,  the  love  of  mother  and  child,  the  tree  of  the  generations,  the  fam..ily, 
the  people,  and  so  at  last  world-history  itself  the  infinitely  deep  facts  and 
problems  of  destiny  that  they  are.  To  death,  as  the  comm.on  lot,  of  every  human 
being  born  into  the  light,  adhere  the  ideas  of  guilt  and  punishment,  of  existence 
as  a penance,  of  a new  life  beyond  the  world  of  this  light,  and  of  a salvation 
that  makes  an  end  of  the  death-fear.  In'  the  knowledge  of  death  is  originated 
that  world-outlook  which  we  possess  as  being  men  and  not  beasts. 

There  are  born  destiny-men  and  causality-men.:,;  A whole  world  separates 
the  purely  living  ^ man;— peasant  and  .'warrior,  statesman  and  general,  man 
of  the  world  and  man  of  business,  everyone  who  wills  to  prosper,  to  rule,  to 
fight,  and  to  dare,  the  organisier  or  entrepreneur,  the  adventurer  or  bravo  or 
gambler —.  from  the  man  who  is  destined  either  by  the  power  of  his  mind  or 
the  defect  of  his  blood  to  be  an  “intellectual*’  — the  saint,  priest,  savant, 
idealist,  or  ideologue.  Being  and  waking-being,  pulse  and  tension,  motives 
and  ideas,  cyclic  organs,  and  touch-organs  — there  has  rarely  been  a man  of 
any  significance  in  . whom  the  one  side  or  the  other  has  not  markedly  pre- 
dominated., All  that  motives  and  urges,  the  eye  for' men  and  situations,  the 
belief  in  his  star  which  every  born  man  of  action  possesses  and  which  is  some- 
thing wholly  different  from  belief  in  the. correctness  of  a standpoint,  the  voices 
of  the  blood  that ' speak  in  moments  - of  decision,  and  the  immovably  quiet 
conviction  that  justifies  any  . aim  and  any  . means  — all  these  are  denied  to  the 
critical,  meditative  man.  Even  the  footfall  of  the  fact-man  sounds  different  from, 
sounds  more  planted  than,  that  of  the  thinker,  in  whom  the  pure  microcosmic 
can  acquire  no  firm  relation  with  earth. 

Destiny  has' made  „.,t,he„man  so  or -so- — subtle . and  fact-shy,  or  active  and 
contemptuous  of  thought.  But  the  man  of  the  active  category  is  a whole  man, 
whereas  in  the  contemplative  a single' organ  can  operate  without  (and  even 
against)  the  body.  All  the  worse,,  then,  when  this  organ  tries  to  master 
actuality  as  well  as  its  own  world,  for  then  we  get  all  those  ethico- 
politico-sociai  reform-projects  which  demonstrate,  unanswerably,  how  things 
ought  to  be  and  how  to  set  about  making  them  so  — theories  that  without 
exception  rest  upon  the  hypothesis  that  all  men  are  as  rich  in  ideas  and  as 
poor  in  motives  as  the  author  is  (or  thinks  he  is).  Such  theories,  even  when 


THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM 


17 

they  have  taken  the  field  armed  with  the  full  authority  of  a religion  or  the 
prestige  of  a famous  name,  have  not  in  one  single  instance  effected  the  slightest 
alteration  in  life.  They  have  merely  caused  us  to  think  otherwise  than  before 
about  life.  And  this,  precisely,  is  the  doom  of  the  “late**  ages  of  a Culture, 
the  ages  of  much  writing  and  much  reading  — that  they  should  perpetually 
confuse  the  opposition  of  life  and  thought  with  the  opposition  between  thought- 
about-life  and  thought-about-thought.  Ail  world-improvers,  priests,  and 
philosophers  are  unanimous  in  holding  that  life  is  a fit  object  for  the  nicest 
meditation,  but  the  life  of  the  world  goes  its  own  way  and  cares  not  in  the 
least  what  is  said  about  it.  And  even  when  a community  succeeds  in  living 
“ according  to  rule,’*  all  that  it  achieves  is,  at  best,  a note  on  itself  in  some 
future  history  of  the  world  — if  there  is  space  left  after  the  proper  and  only 
important  subject-matter  has  been  dealt  with. 

For,  in  the  last  resort,  only  the  active  man,  the  man  of  destiny,  lives  in 
actual  world,  the  world  of  political,  military,  and  economic  decisions,  in 
which  concepts  and  systems  do  not  figure  or  count.  Here  a shrewd  blow  is 
more  than  a shrewd  conclusion,  and  there  is  sense  in  the  contempt  with  which 
statesmen  and  soldiers  of  all  times  have  regarded  the  “ink-slinger”  and  the 
“bookworm”  who  think  that  world-history  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  intellect 
or  science  or  even  art.  Let  us  say  it  frankly  and  without  ambiguity:  the 
understanding  divorced  from  sensation  is  only  one,  and  not  the  decisive,  side 
of  life.  A history  of  Western  thought  may  not  contain  the  name  of  Napoleon, 
but  in  the  history  of  actuality  Archimedes,  for  all  his  scientific  discoveries, 
was  possibly  less  efiFective  than  that  soldier  who  killed  him  at  the  storming  of 
Syracuse. 

Men  of  theory  commit  a huge  mistake  in  believing  that  their  place  is  at 
the  head  and  not  in  the  train  of  great  events.  They  misunderstand  completely 
the  role  played,  for  example,  by  the  political  Sophists  in  Athens  or  by  Voltaire 
and  Rousseau  in  France.  Often  enough  a statesman  does  not  “ know”  what  he 
is  doing,  but  that  does  not  prevent  him  from  following  with  confidence  just 
the  one  path  that  leads  to  success;  the  political  doctrinaire,  on  the  contrary, 
always  knows  what  should  be  done,  and  yet  his  activity,  once  it  ceases  to  be 
limited  to  paper,  is  the  least  successful  and  therefore  the  least  valuable  in 
history.  These  intrusions  happen  only  too  frequently  in  times  of  uncertainty, 
like  that  of  the  Attic  enlightenment,  or  the  French  or  the  German  revolutions, 
when  the  ideologue  of  word  or  pen  is  eager  to  be  busy  with  the  actual  history 
of  the  people  instead  of  with  systems.  He  mistakes  his  place.  He  belongs 
with  his  principles  and  programs  to  no  history  but  the  history  of  a literature. 
Real  history  passes  judgment  on  him  not  by  controverting  the  theorist,  but  by 
leaving  him  and  all  his  thoughts  to  himself.  A Plato  or  a Rousseau  — not  to 
mention  the  smaller  intellects  — could  build  up  abstract  political  structures, 
but  for  Alexander,  Scipio,  Csesar,  and  Napoleon,  with  their  schemes  and 


,i8  ' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

battles  and  settlements,  they  were  entirely  without  importance.  The  thinker 
could  discuss  destiny  if  he  liked;  it  was  enough  for  these  men  to  be  destiny. 

Under  all  the  plurality  of  microcosmic  beings,  we  are  perpetually  meeting 
with  the  formation  of  inspired  mass-units^  beings  of  a higher  order,  which^ 
whether  they  develop  slowly  or  come  into  existence  in  a moment,  contain 
all  the  feelings  and  passions  of  the  individual,  enigmatic  in  their  inward  char- 
acter and  inaccessible  to  reasoning  — though  the  connoisseur  can  see  into  and 
reckon  upon  their  reactions  well  enough.  Here  too  we  distinguish  the  generic 
animal  unities  which  are  sensed,  the  unities  profoundly  dependent  upon  Being 
and  Destiny  — like  the  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  air  or  the  way  of  the  stormers 
on  the  breach  — from  the  purely  human  associations  which  depend  upon  the 
understanding  and  cohere  on  the  basis  of  like  opinions,  like  purposes,  or  like 
knowledge.  Unity  of  cosmic  pulse  one  has  without  willing  to  have  it;  unity 
of  common  ground  is  acquired  at  will.  One  can  join  or  resign  from  an  intel- 
lectual association  as  one  pleases,  for  only  one’s  waking-consciousness  is 
involved.  But  to  a cosmic  unity  one  is  committed^  and  committed  with  one’s 
entire  being.  Crowds  of  this  order  of  unity  are  seized  by  storms  of  enthusiasm 
or,  as  readily,  of  panic.  They  are  noisy  and  ecstatic  at  Eleusis  or  Lourdes,  or 
heroically  firm  like  the  Spartans  of  Thermopylae  and  the  last  Goths  in  the 
battle  of  Vesuvius.^  They  form  themselves  to  the  music  of  chorales,  marches, 
and  dances,  and  are  sensitive  like  human  and  animal  thoroughbreds  to  the  effects 
of  bright  colours,  decoration,  costume,  and  uniform. 

These  inspired  aggregates  arc  born  and  die.  Intellectual  associations  are 
mere  sums  in  the  mathematical  sense,  varying  by  addition  and  subtraction, 
unless  and  until  (as  sometimes  happens)  a mere  coincidence  of  opinion  strikes  so 
impressively  as  to  reach  the  blood  and  so,  suddenly,  to  create  out  of  the  sum 
a Being.  In  any  political  turning-point  words  may  become  fates  and  opinions 
passions.  A chance  crowd  is  herded  together  in  the  street  and  has  me  con- 
sciousness, sensation,  one  language  — until  the  short-lived  soul  flickers  out 
and  everyone  goes  his  way  again.  This  happened  every  day  in  the  Paris  of 
1785,  whenever  the  cry  of  la  lanteme!''  fell  upon  the  ear. 

These  souls  have  their  special  psychology,^  and  the  knowledge  of  this 
psychology  is  for  the  public  man  an  essential.  A single  soul  is  the  mark  of 
every  genuine  order  or  class,  be  it  the  chivalry  and  military  orders  of  the 
Crusades,  the  Roman  Senate  or  the  Jacobin  club,  polite  society  under  Louis  XIV 
or  the  Prussian  country  peasantry  or  guilds,  the  masses  of  the  big 

city  or  the  folk  of  the  secluded  valley,  the  peoples  and  tribes  of  the  migrations 
or  the  adherents  of  Mohammed  and,  generally,  of  any  new-founded  religion 
or  sect,  the  French  of  the  Revolution  or  the  Germans  of  the  Wars  of  Libera- 

^ A.D.  553  (Gibbon,  cR  xliii).  — Tf. 

2 G,  Lc  Bon*s  ’Psychologk  des  (whkb  has  been  translated  into  English  tinder  the  title  Th 
Crowd)  is  the  pioneer  work  on  this  subject,  and  though  unduly  coloured  perhaps  by  the  author’s 
personal  prepossessions,  still  retains  its  interest  and  value.  — Jr. 


THE  COSMIC  AND  THE  MICROCOSM  13 

tioa.  The  mightiest  beings  of  this  kind  that  we  know  are  the  higher  Cultures, 
which  are  born  in  great  spiritual  upheavals,  and  in  a thousand  years  of  exist- 
ence weld  all  aggregates  of  lower  degree  — nations,  classes,  towns,  genera- 
tions— into  one  unit. 

Ail  grand  events  of  history  are  carried  by  beings  of  the  cosmic  order,  by 
peoples,  parties,  armies,  and  classes,  while  the  history  of  the  intellect  runs  its 
course  in  loose  associations  and  circles,  schools,  levels  of  education,  “ten- 
dencies” and  “isms.”  And  here  again  it  is  a question  of  destiny  whether  such 
aggregates  at  the  decisive  moments  of  highest  effectiveness  find  a leader  or  are 
driven  blindly  on,  whether  the  chance  headmen  are  men  of  the  first  order  or 
men  of  no  real  significance  tossed  up,  like  Robespierre  or  Pompey,  by  the  surge 
of  events.  It  is  the  hall-mark  of  the  statesman  that  he  has  a sure  and  pene- 
trating eye  for  these  mass-souls  that  form  and  dissolve  on  the  tide  of  the  times, 
their  strength  and  their  duration,  their  direction  and  purpose.  And  even  so, 
it  is  a question  of  Incident  ^ whether  he  is  one  who  can  master  them  or  one  who 
is  swept  away  by  them. 

^ See  Vol,  I.,  pp.  139,  et  seq.  — Tr. 


CHAPTER  II 


ORIGIN 


AND  LANDSCAPE 


(B) 

THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES 


CHAPTER  II 


ORIGIN  AND  LANDSCAPE 
(B) 

TOE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES 

' ' ^ 

Now,  inan  — no  matter  whether  it  is  for  life  or  for  thought  that  he  is  born 
into  the  world  — so  long  as  he  is  acting  or  is  thinking,  is  awake  and  therefore 
in  focus  — • i.e.,  adjusted  to  the  one  significance  that  for  the  moment  his  light- 
world  holds  for  him.  Everyone  knows  that  it  is  almost  sharply  painful  to 
switch  off  suddenly  in  the  middle  of,  say,  an  experiment  in  physics,  in  order 
to  think  about  some  event  of  the  day.  I have  said  earlier  that  the  innumerable 
settings  that  take  turns  in  man's  waking  consciousness  fall  into  two  distinct 
groups  — the  worlds  of  destiny  and  pulsation,  and  the  worlds  of  causes  and  ten- 
sions* The  two  pictures  I have  called  w&rld-as-histary  and  world-^as-nature.  In 
the  first,  life  makes  use  of  critical  understanding.  It  has  the  eye  under  com- 
mand, the  felt  pulsation  becomes  the  inwardly  imagined  wave-train,  and  the 
shattering  spiritual  experience  becomes  pictured  as  the  epochal  peak.  In  the  sec- 
ond, thought  itself  rules,  and  its  causal  criticism  turns  life  into  a rigorous  process, 
the  living  content  of  a fact  into  an  abstract  truth,  and  tension  into  formula. 

How  is  this  possible?  Each  is  an  eye-picture,  but  in  the  one  the  seer  is  giv- 
ing himself  up  to  the  never-to-be-repeated  facts,  and  in  the  other  he  is  striving 
to  catch  truths  for  an  ever-valid  system.  In  the  history-picture,  that  in  which 
knowledge  is  simply  an  auxiliary^  the  cosmic  makes  use  of  the  microcosmic. 
In  the  picture  which  we  call  memory  and  recollection,  things  are  present  to  us 
as  bathed  in  an  inner  light  and  swept  by  the  pulsation  of  our  existence.  But 
the  chronological  element  ^ tells  us  that  history,  as  soon  as  it  becomes  thought 
history,  is  no  longer  immune  from  the  basic  conditions  of  all  waking-con- 
sciousness. In  the  nature-  (or  science-)  picture  it  is  the  ever-present  subjective 
that  is  alien  and  illusive,  but  in  the  history-picture  it  is  the  equally  inelim- 
inable  objective,  Number,  that  leads  into  error* 

When  we  are  working  in  the  domain  of  Nature  (science),  our  settings  and 
self-adjustments  should  be  and  can  be  up  to  a certain  point  impersonal  — 
one  “forgets  oneself"  — but  every  man,  class,  nation,  or  family  sees  the 
picture  of  history  in  relation  to  itself.  , The  mark  of  Nature  is  an  extension  that 
is  inclusive  of  everything,  but  History  is  that  which  comes  up  out  of  the  dark- 

^ Meaning  here  names,  dates,  numbers  the  dbrpnology  in  the  usual  extensive  sense,  and  not 
the  intensive  or  deep  sense.  Sec  Vol.  I,  pp.  ^7,  153  (foot-note).  — Tr.  ; 


DECLINE 'OF  THE  WEST 

ness  of  the  past,  presents  itself  to  the  seer,  and  from  him  sweeps  onward  into  the 
future.  ^He,  as  the  present,  is  always  its  middle  point,  and  it  is  quite  impossible 
for  him  to  order  the  facts  with  any  meaning  if  he  ignores  their  direction  — 
which  is  an  element  proper  to  life  and  not  to  thought.  Every  time,  cYcry 
land,  every  living  aggregate  has  its  own  historical  horizon,  and  it  is  the  mark 
of  the  genuine  historical  thinker  that  he  actualizes  the  picture  of  history  that 
his  time  demands. 

Thus  Nature  and  History  are  distinguishable  like  pure  and  impure  criticism 
— meaning  by  criticism'’  the  opposite  of  lived  experience.  Natural  science 
is  criticism  and  nothing  else.  But  in  History,  criticism  can  do  no  more  than 
scientifically  prepare  the  field  over  which  the  historian’s  eye  is  to  sweep. 
History  is  that  ranging  glance  itself,  whatever  the  direction  in  which  it  ranges. 
He  who  possesses  such  an  eye  can  understand  every  fact  and  every  situation 
“historically.”  Nature  is  a system,  and  systems  can  be  learnt. 

The  process  oi  historical  begins  for  everyone  with  the  earliest 

impressions  of  childhood.  Children’s  eyes  are  keen,  and  the  facts  of  the  nearest 
environment,  the  life  of  the  family  and  the  house  and  the  street,  arc  sensed 
and  felt  right  down  to  the  core,  long  before  the  city  and  its  population  come 
into  their  visual  field,  and  while  the  words  “people,”  “countr}%”  “state,” 
are  still  quite  destitute  of  tangible  meaning  to  them.  Just  so,  and  so  thor- 
oughly, primitive  man  knows  all  that  is  presented  to  his  narrow  field  of  view 
as  history,  as  living  — and  above  all  Life  itself,  the  drama  of  birth  and  death, 
sickness  and  eld;  the  history  of  passionate  war  and  passionate  love,  as  ex- 
perienced in  himself  or  observed  in  others;  the  fate  of  relatives,  of  the  clan, 
of  the  village,  their  actions  and  their  motives;  tales  of  long  enmity,  of  fights, 
victory,  and  revenge.  The  life-horizon  widens,  and  shows  not  lives,  but  Life 
coming  and  going.  The  pageant  is  not  now  of  villages  and  clans,  but  of  remote 
races  and  countries;  not  of  years,  but  of  centuries.  The  history  that  is  actually 
lived  with  and  participated  in  never  reaches  over  more  than  a grandfather’s 
span  — neither  for  ancient  Germans  and  present-day  Negroes,  nor  for 
Pericles  and  Wallenstein.  Here  the  horizon  of  living  ends,  and  a new  plane 
begins  wherein  the  picture  is  based  upon  hearsay  and  historical  tradition,  a 
plane  in  which  direct  sympathies  are  adapted  to  a mind-picture  that  is  both 
distinct  and,  from  long  use,  stable.  The  picture  so  developed  shows  very 
different  amplitudes  for  the  men  of  the  different  Cultures.  For  us  Westerners 
it  is  with  this  secondary  picture  that  genuine  history  begins,  for  we  live  under 
the  aspect  of  eternity,  whereas  for  the  Greeks  and  Romans  it  is  just  then  that 
history  ceases.  For  Thucydides^  the  events  of  the  Persian  Wars,  for  C^sar 
those  of  the  Punic  Wars,  were  already  devoid  of  living  import. 

^ He  affirmed,  on  the  first  page  of  his  history  C^^bout  400  b.c.)  that  before  his  time  nothing  ol 
significance  had  happened  (ph  peyaXa  vofiL^ca  'y&kffdai  ovre  Kard  roh%  'S'dXkfLovs  oiire  ks  ra  BX\a.  Thn- 
cydidcs,  I,  I.). 


OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  ::z5 

And  beyond  this  plane  again,  other  historic  unit-pictures  rise  to  the  view  — 
pictures  of  the  destinies  of  the  plant  world  and  the  animal  world,  the  land- 
scape, the  stars  — which  at  the  last  fuse  with  the  last  pictures  of  natural  science 
into  mythic  images  of  the  creation  and  the  end  of  the  world. 

The  nature-  (science-)  picture  of  the  child  and  the  primitive  develops  out 
of  the  petty  technique  of  every  day,  which  perpetually  forces  both  of  them  to 
turn  away  i&rom  the  fearful  contemplation  of  wide  nature  to  the  critique  of  the 
facts  and  situations  of  their  near  environment.  Like  the  young  animal,  the 
child  discovers  its  first  truths  through  play.  Examining  the  toy,  cutting 
open  the  doll,  turning  the  mirror  round  to  see  what  is  behind  it,  the  feeling  of 
triumph  in  having  established  something  as  corrrect  for  good  and  all-— no 
nature-research  whatsoever  has  got  beyond  this.  Primitive  man  applies  this 
critical  experience,  as  he  acquires  it,,  to  his  arms  and  tools,  to  the  materials 
for  his  clothing,  food,  and  housing  — i.e.,  to  things  in  so  far  as  they  are  dead. 
He  applies  it  to  animals  as  well  when  suddenly  they  cease  to  have  meaning 
for  him  as  living  beings  whose  movements  he  watches  and  divines  as  pursuer 
or  pursued,  and  are  apprehended  mechanically  instead  of  vitally,  as  aggre- 
gates of  flesh  and  bone  for  which  he  has  a definite  use  — exactly  as  he  is  con- 
scious of  an  event,  now  as  the  act  of  a daemon  and  a moment  afterwards  as  a 
sequence  of  cause  and  effect.  The  mature  man  of  the  Culture  transposes  in 
exactly  the  same  way,  every  day  and  every  hour.  Here,  too,  is  a “ nature* '- 
horizon,  and  beyond  it  lies  the  secondary  plane  formed  of  our  impressions  of 
rain,  lightning,  and  tempest,  summer  and  winter,  moon-phases  and  star-courses. 
But  at  that  plane  religiousness,  trembling  with  fear  and  awe,  forces  upon  man 
criteria  of  a far  higher  kind.  Just  as  in  the  history-picture  he  sounds  the  ul- 
timate facts  of  life,  so  here  he  seeks  to  establish  the  ultimate  truths  of  nature. 
What  lies  beyond  any  attainable  frontier  of  knowledge  he  calls  God,  and 
all  that  lies  within  that  frontier  he  strives  to  comprehend  — as  action,  cre- 
ation, and  manifestation  of  God  — causally. 

Every  group  of  scientifically  established  elements,  therefore,  has  a dual 
tendency,  inherent  and  unchanged  since  primitive  ages.  The  one  tendency 
urges  forwards  the  completest  possible  system  of  technical  knowledge,  for  the 
service  of  practical,  economical,  and  warlike  ends,  which  many  kinds  of  animals 
have  developed  to  a high  degree  of  perfection,  and  which  from  them  leads, 
through  primitive  man  and  his  acquaintance  with  fire  and  metals,  directly  to 
the  machine-technics  of  our  Faustian  Culture.  The  other  tendency  took  shape 
only  with  the  separation  of  strictly  human  thought  from  physical  vision  by 
means  of  language,  and  the  aim  of  its  effort  has  been  an  equally  complete 
theoretical  knowledge,  which  we  call  in  the  earlier  phases  of  the  Culture  re- 
ligious., and  in  the  later  scientific.  Fire  is  for  the  warrior  a weapon,  for  the  crafts- 
man part  of  his  equipment,  for  the  priest  a sign  from  God,  and  for  the  scientist 
a problem.  But  in  all  these  aspects  alike  it  is  proper  to  the  “natural,”  the 


x6  ' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  : 

scientific,  mode  of  waking-consciousness.  In  the  worM-as-Mstory  we  do  not 
find  fire  as  such,  ; but  the  conflagration  of  Carthage  and  the  flames  of  the,  fag- 
gots heaped  around  John  Hus  and  Giordano  Bruno. 

n 

1 xcpeat,  every  being  livingly  experiences  every  other  being  and  its  destiny 
onlj  m relation  to  itself.  A flock  of  pigeons  is  regarded  by  the  farmer  on  whose 
fields  it  settles  quite  otherwise  than  by  the  nature-lover  in  the  street  or  the 
hawk  in  the  air.  The  peasant  sees  in  his  son  the  future  and  the  heritage,  but 
what  the  neighbour  sees  in  him  is  a peasant,  what  the  officer  sees  is  a soldier, 
what  the  visitor  sees  is  a native.  Napoleon  experienced  men  and  things  very 
differently  as  Emperor  and  as  lieutenant.  Put  a man  in  a new  situation,  make 
the  revolutionary  a minister,  the  soldier  a general,  and  at  once  history  and  the 
key  men  of  history  become  for  him  something  other  than  what  they  were. 
Talleyrand  saw  through  the  men  of  his  time  because  he  belonged  with  them, 
but  had  he  been  suddenly  plumped  down  in  the  company  of  Crassus,  Cmsar, 
Catiline,  and  Cicero,  his  understanding  of  their  measures  and  views  would 
have  been  either  null  or  erroneous.  There  is  no  history-in-itself-  The  history 
of  a family  is  taken  differently  by  each  member  of  it,  that  of  a country  differently 
by  each  party,  that  of  the  age  by  each  nation.  The  German  looks  upon  the 
World  War  otherwise  than  the  Englishman,  the  workman  upon  economic 
history  otherwise  than  the  employer,  and  the  historian  of  the  West  has  a quite 
other  world-history  before  his  eyes  than  that  of  the  great  Arabian  and  Chinese 
historians.  The  history  of  an  era  could  be  handled  objectively  only  if  it  were 
very  distant  in  time,  and  the  historian  were  radically  disinterested;  and  wc 
find  that  our  best  historians  cannot  judge  of  or  describe  even  the  Peloponnesian 
Wars  and  Actium  without  being  in  some  measure  influenced  by  present  in- 
terests. 

It  is  not  incompatible  with,  rather  it  is  essential  to,  a profound  knowledge 
of  men  that  the  appraiser  should  see  through  glasses  of  his  own  colour.  This 
knowledge,  indeed,  is  exactly  the  component  that  we  discern  to  be  wanting  in 
those  generalizations  that  distort  or  altogether  ignore  that  all-important  fact, 
the  uniqueness  of  the  constituent  event  in  history  ^ — the  worst  example  of 
this  being  the  ‘‘materialistic”  conception  of  history,  about  which  we  have 
said  almost  all  there  is  to  say  when  we  have  described  it  as  physiognomic 
barrenness.  But  both  in  spite  of  this  and  on  account  of  this  ^ there  is  for  every 
man,  because  he  belongs  to  a class  and  a time  and  a nation  and  a Culture,  a 
typical  picture  of  history  as  it  ought  to  appear  in  relation  to  himself,  and 
equally  there  are  typical  pictures  specific  to  the  time  or  class  or  Culture,  qua 

^ Original:  **  AUes  Bedeutende,  namlkh  das  Bitmalige  der  Geschichte*"  — Tr. 

2 I suppose  the  meaning  of  these  words  to  be  that  generalization  and  flair  arc  not  really  op- 
posed, but  interdependent.  — Tr. 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  x/ 

time  or  class  or  Culture.  The  supreme  generalization  possible  to  each  Culture 
as  a major  being  is  a primary  and,  for  it,  symbolical  image  of  its  own  world- 
as-history,  and  all  self-attuncments  of  the  individual  — or  of  the  group  livingly 
effective  as  individual  — are  with  reference  to  that  image.  Whenever  we 
describe  another  person’s  ideas  as  profound  or  superficial,  original  or  trivial, 
mistaken  or  obsolete,  we  are  unwittingly  judging  them  with  reference  to  a 
picture  which  springs  up  to  answer  for  the  value  at  the  moment  of  a contin- 
uous function  of  our  time  and  our  personality.^ 

Obviously,  then,  every  man  of  the  Faustian  Culture  possesses  his  own 
picture  of  history  and,  besides,  innumerable  other  pictures  from  his  youth 
upwards,  which  fluctuate  and  alter  ceaselessly  in  response  to  the  experiences 
of  the  day  and  the  year.  And  how  different,  again,  are  the  typical  history- 
images  of  men  and  different  eras  and  classes,  the  world  of  Otto  the  Great  and 
that  of  Gregory  VII,  that  of  a Doge  of  Venice  and  that  of  a poor  pilgrim  ! 
In  what  different  worlds  lived  Lorenzo  de’  Medici,  Wallenstein,  Cromwell, 
Marat,  and  Bismarck,  a serf  of  the  Gothic  age,  a savant  of  the  Baroque,  the 
army  officer  of  the  Thirty  Years’  War,  the  Seven  YearsV  War,  and  the  Wars  of 
Liberation  respectively  I Or,  to  consider  our  own  times  alone,  a Frisian  peas- 
ant whose  life  of  actuality  is  limited  to  his  own  countryside  and  its  folk,  a 
high  merchant  of  Hamburg,  and  a professor  of  physics!  And  yet  to  all  of 
these,  irrespective  of  individual  age,  status,  and  period,  there  is  a common 
basis  that  differentiates  the  ensemble  of  these  figures,  their  prime-image, 
from  that  of  every  other  Culture. 

But,  over  and  above  this,  there  is  a distinction  of  another  kind  which 
separates  the  Classical  and  the  Indian  history-pictures  from  those  of  the  Chi- 
nese, the  Arabian,  and,  most  of  all,  the  Western  Cultures  — the  narrow  horizon 
of  the  two  first-named.  Whatever  the  Greeks  may  (and  indeed  must)  have 
known  of  ancient  Egyptian  history,  they  never  allowed  it  to  penetrate  into 
their  peculiar  history-picture,  which  for  the  majority  was  limited  to  the  field 
of  events  that  could  be  related  by  the  oldest  surviving  participant,  and  which 
even  for  the  finer  minds  stopped  at  the  Trojan  War,  a frontier  beyond  which 
they  would  not  concede  that  there  had  been  historical  life  at  all.^ 

The  Arabian  Culture,^  on  the  other  hand,  very  early  dared  the  astounding 
gesture  — we  see  it  in  the  historical  thought  alike  of  the  Jews  and  of  the 
Persians  from  Cyrus’s  time  — - of  connecting  the  legend  of  creation  to  the  present 
by  means  of  a genuine  chronology;  the  Persians  indeed  comprised  the  future 
as  well  in  the  sweep  of  the  gesture,  and  predated  the  last  judgment  and  the 

^ Original;  So  geschieht  dies  stefs  , . ^ im  Hinblkk  auf  das  im  Augcnbiick  geforderte  Bild  als 
der  hestandigen  Funhion  der  Zeit  and  des  Msnschm. ' " — Tr. 

® Even  at  the  level  of  the  Trojan  War  the  timeless  mythological  figures  of  gods  and  demigods 
are  still  involved,  intimately  and  in  detail,  in  the  human  story.  See,  on  the  whole  question  of 
the  Greek  attitude  towards  time  and  history,  VoL  I,  p.  9 and  passim.  — Tf. 

® Sec  Chapter  Vm  below.  — Tr. 


\ ■ :TH:E  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

coining  of  the  Messiah.  This  exact  and  Ycty  narrow  definition  of  human 
history —.the  Persian  reckoning:  ■' allows  twelve  inillennia  from  first , to  last, 
the  Jewish  counts  less  than  six  up  to'  the  present  — is  a necessary  expression  of 
the,  Magian  world-feeling  and  fundamentally  distinguishes  the  Jiidxo-Pcrsian 
creation-sagas  from  those  of  the  Babylonian  Culture,  from  which  so  many  of 
their  external  traits  are  derived. 

Different,  again,  are  the  primary  feelings  which  give  historical  thought 
in  the  Chinese  and  the  Egyptian  Cultures  its  characteristically  wide  and 
unbounded  horizons,  represented  by  chronologically  stated  sequences  of 
dynasties  which  stretch  over  millennia  and  finally  dissolve  into  a grey 
remoteness. 

The  Faustian  picture  of  world-history,  again,  prepared  in  advance  by  the 
existence  of  a Christian  chronology,^  came  into  being  suddenly,  with  an  im- 
mense extension  and  deepening  of  the  Magian  picture  which  the  Western 
Church  had  taken  over,  an  extension  and  deepening  that  was  to  give  Joachim 
of  Floris  ^ in  the  high  Gothic  the  basis  of  his  wonderful  interpretation  of  ail 
world-destinies  as  a sequence  of  three  asons  under  the  aspects  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Parallel  with  this  there  was  an  immense  widen- 
ing of  the  geographical  horizon,  which  even  in  Gothic  times  (thanks  to  Vikings 
and  Crusaders)  came  to  extend  from  Iceland  to  the  remotest  ends  of  Asia;  ® and 
from  1500  onwards,  the  developed  man  of  the  Baroque  is  able  to  do  what  none 
of  his  peers  in  the  other  Cultures  could  do  and  — • for  the  first  time  in  human 
history  — to  regard  the  whole  surface  of  the  planet  as  its  field.  Thanks  to  com- 
pass and  telescope,  the  savant  of  that  mature  age  could  for  the  first  time  not 
merely  posit  the  sphericity  of  the  earth  as  a matter  of  theory,  but  actually  feci 
that  he  was  living  upon  a sphere  in  space.  The  land-horizon  is  no  more.  So, 
too,  time-horizons  melt  in  the  double  endlessness  of  the  calendar  before  and  after 
Christ.  And  to-day,  under  the  influence  of  this  picture,  which  comprises  the 
whole  planet  and  will  eventually  embrace  all  the  high  Cultures,  the  old  Gothic 
division  of  history  into  “ancient,**  “mediaeval,**  and  modern,  long  become 
trite  and  empty,  is  visibly  dissolving.'^ 

In  all  other  Cultures  the  aspects  of  world-history  and  of  man-history  co- 
incide. The  beginning  of  the  world  is  the  beginning  of  man,  and  the  cod  of 
man  is  the  end  of  the  world.  But  the  Faustian  infinity-craving  for  the  first 
time  separated  the  two  notions  during  the  Baroque,  and  now  it  has  made 
human  history,  for  all  its  immense  and  still  unknown  span,  a mere  episode  in 
world-history^  while  the  Earth  — of  which  other  Cultures  had  seen  not  even 

^ Introduced  in  Rome  in  51^  during  tiic  Ostrogoth  domination,  not  until  Charlemagne’s  times 
did  it  make  headway  in  the  Germanic  lands.  Then,  howcTcr,  its^pread  was  rapid. 

^ See  VoL  I,  p,  19.  — Tr. 

® On  the  other  hand  — and  very  significantly  — the  field  of  the  history-picture  livingly  ex- 
perienced in  the  consciousness  of  the  sincere  Renaissance  classicist  markedly  contracted. 

^SceVoLLp.  ifi.  — Tr. 


THE  ' GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  19 

the  whole,  but  only  siipetficial  fractions  as  *‘the  world’* —has  become  a 
little  star  amongst  millions  of  solar  systems. 

The  extension  of  the  historical  world-picture  makes  it  even  more  necessary 
in  this  Culture  than  in  any  other  to  distinguish  between  the  everyday  self- 
attunements  of  ordinary  people  and  that  extreme  self-attunement  of  which 
only  the  highest  minds  are  capable,  and  which  even  in  them  holds*  only  for 
moments.  The  difference  between  the  historical  view-field  of  Themistocles 
and  that  of  an  Attic  husbandman  is  probably  very  small,  but  this  difference 
is  already  immense  as  between  Henry  VI  and  a hind  of  his  day,^  and  as  the 
Faustian  Culture  mounts  up  and  up,  the  power  of  self-focusing  attains  to  such 
heights  and  depths  that  the  circle  of  adepts  grows  ever  smaller  and  smaller. 
In  fact,  there  is  formed  a sort  of  pyramid  of  possibilities,  in  which  indi- 
viduals are  graded  according  to  their  endowments;  every  individual,  according 
to  his  constitution,  stands  at  the  level  which  he  is  capable  at  his  best  focus 
of  holding.  But  it  follows  from  this  that  between  Western  men  there  are 
limitations  to  the  possibilities  of  reciprocal  understanding  of  historical  life- 
problems,  limitations  that  do  not  apply  to  other  Cultures,  at  any  rate  in  such 
fateful  rigour  as  they  do  to  ours.  Can  a workman  to-day  really  understand 
a peasant?  Or  a diplomat  a craftsman?  The  historico-geographical  horizon 
that  determines  for  each  of  them  the  questions  worth  asking  and  the  form  in 
which  these  are  asked  is  so  different  from  the  horizons  of  the  others  that  what 
they  can  exchange  is  not  a communication,  but  passing  remarks.  It  is,  of 
course,  the  mark  of  the  real  appraiser  of  man  that  he  understands  how  *‘the 
other  man”  is  adjusted  and  regulates  his  intercourse  with  him  accordingly 
(as  we  all  do  in  talking  to  children),  but  the  art  of  appraising  in  this  sense 
some  man  of  the  past  (say  Henry  the  Lion  or  Dante),  of  living  oneself  into  his 
history-picture  so  thoroughly  that  his  thoughts,  feelings,  and  decisions  take  on 
a character  of  self-evidence,  is,  owing  to  the  vast  difference  between  the  one’s 
and  the  other’s  waking  consciousness,  so  rare  that  up  to  the  eighteenth  century 
it  was  not  even  seen  that  the  historian  ought  to  attempt  it.  Only  since  1800 
has  it  become  a desideratum  for  the  writing  of  history,  and  it  is  one  very  seldom 
satisfied  at  that. 

The  typically  Faustian  separation  of  human  history,  as  such,  from  the  far 
wider  history  of  the  world  has  had  the  result  that  since  the  end  of  the  Baroque 
our  world-picture  has  contained  several  horizons  disposed  one  behind  the  other 
in  as  many  planes.  For  the  exploration  of  these,  individual  sciences,  more 
or  less  overtly  historical  in  character,  have  taken  shape.  Astronomy,  geology, 
biology,  anthropology,  one  after  the  other  follow  up  the  destinies  of  the  star- 
world,  the  earth’s  crust,  life,  and  man,  and  only  then  do  we  come  to  the 
“world ’’“history  — as  it  is  still  called  even  to-day  — of  the  higher  Cultures,  to 
which,  again,  are  attached  the  histories  of  the  several  cultural  elements,  family 
^ The  Emperor  Henry  VI  reigned  1190-7.  — Tf. 


JO  . THE.  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  . 

Mstorf,  . and , lastly  (that' highly  developed  speciality  of  the  West)  biog- 
raphy. ■ '.  ", 

Each  of  these  planes  demands  a particular  self-focusing,  and  the  momcni: 
the  special  focus  becomes  sharp  the  narrower  and  the  broader  planes  cease  to 
be,  live'. Being  and  become  mere  given  facts.  If  we  arc  investigating  the  battle 
of  the  Teutobu|:ger  Wald,  the  growing  up  of  this  forest  in  the  plant-world  of 
the  North  German  plain  is  presupposed.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  wc  ate  ex- 
amining into  the  history  of  the  German  tree-world,  the  geological  stratifica- 
tion of  the  earth  is  the  presupposition,  though  it  is  just  a fact  whose  particular 
destiny  need  not  be  further  followed  out  in  this  connexion.  If,  again,  our 
question  is  the  origin  of  the  Cretaceous,  the  existence  of  the  Earth  itself  as  a 
planet  in  the  solar  system  is  a datum,  not  a problem.  Or,  to  express  it  other- 
wise, that  there  is  an  Earth  in  the  star-world,  that  the  phenomenon  **lifc** 
occurs  in  the  Earth,  that  within  this  ‘*iife’*  there  is  the  form  “man/*  that 
within  the  history  of  man  there  exists  the  organic  form  of  the  Culture,  is  in 
each  case  an  incident  in  the  picture  of  the  next  higher  plane. 

In  Goethe,  from  his  Strassburg  period  to  his  first  Weimar  residence,  the 
inclination  to  attune  himself  to  “world* ’-history  was  very  strong  — as  evi- 
denced in  his  Cassar,  Mohammed,  Socrates,  Wandering  Jew,  and  Egmont 
sketches.  And  after  that  painful  renunciation  of  the  prospect  of  high  political 
achievement  — the  pain  which  calls  to  us  in  Tasso  even  through  the  sober 
resignedness  of  its  final  form  — this  precisely  was  the  attunement  that  he  chose 
to  cut  out  of  his  life;  and  thereafter  he  limits  himself,  almost  fiercely,  to 
the  picture-planes  of  plant-history,  animal-history,  and  earth-history  (his 
“living  nature”)  on  the  one  hand  and  to  biography  on  the  other. 

All  these  “pictures,”  developed  in  the  same  man,  have  the  same  structure. 
Even  the  history  of  plants  and  animals,  even  that  of  the  earth’s  crust  or  that  of 
the  stars,  is  a fable  convmue  mirrors  in  outward  actuality  the  inward  tend- 
ency of  the  ego’s  being.  The  student  of  the  animal  world  or  of  stratification 
is  a man,  living  in  a period  and  having  a nationality  and  a social  status,  and 
it  is  no  more  possible  to  eliminate  his  subjective  standpoint  from  his  treatment 
of  these  things  than  it  would  be  to  obtain  a perfectly  abstract  account  of  the 
French  Revolution  or  the  World  War.  The  celebrated  theories  of  Kant, 
Laplace,  Cuvier,  Lyell,  Darwin,  have  also  a politico-economic  tinting,  and 
their  very  power  and  impressiveness  for  the  lay  public  show  that  the  mode  of 
outlook  upon  all  these  historical  planes  proceeds  from  a single  source.  And 
what  is  accomplishing  itself  to-day  is  the  final  achievement  of  which  Faustian 
history-thinking  is  capable  — the  organic  linking  and  disposition  of  these 
historical  planes  in  a single  vast  world-history  of  uniform  physiognomic  that 

^ During  his  Italian  sojourn  of  1786-8  Goethe  made  up  his  mind  to  resign  his  political  offices 
at  Weimar,  retaining  merely  a non-executive  scat  on  the  Council  and  definitely  devoting  himself  to 
art  and  science.  This  resolution  he  carried  into  effect  on  his  return  to  Weimar  in  1788;  Tasso  finally 
appeared  in  1750.  — Tr. 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER'  CULTURES  31  ; 

shall  enable  our  glance  to  range  from  the  life  of  the  individual  man  without  a 
break  to  the  first  and  last  destinies  of  the  universe.  The  nineteenth  century 
— in  mechanistic  (i.e.,  unhistorical)  form  — enunciated  the  problem.  It  is 
one  of  the  preordained  tasks  of  the  twentieth  to  solve  it. 

in 

The  picture  that  we  possess  of  the  history  of  the  Earth's  crust  and  of  life 
is  at  present  still  dominated  by  the  ideas  which  civilized  ^ English  thought 
has  developed,  since  the  Age  of  Enlightenment,  out  of  the  English  habit  of 
life  — LyelFs  “phlegmatic”  theory  of  the  formation  of  the  geological  strata, 
and  Darwin's  of  the  origin  of  species,  are  actually  but  derivatives  of  the  de- 
velopment of  England  herself.  In  place  of  the  incalculable  catastrophes  and 
metamorphoses  such  as  von  Buch  and  Cuvier  ^ admitted,  they  put  a methodical 
evolution  over  very  long  periods  of  time  and  recognize  as  causes  only  scim- 
tifically  calculable  and  indeed  mechanical  utility-causes. 

This  “English”  type  of  causality  is  not  only  shallow,  but  also  far  too 
narrow.  It  limits  possible  causal  connexions,  in  the  first  place,  to  those  which 
work  out  their  entire  course  on  the  earth’s  surface;  but  this  immediately  ex- 
cludes all  great  cosmic  relations  between  earthly  life-phenomena  and  the 
events  of  the  solar  system  and  the  stellar  universe,  and  assumes  the  impossible 
postulate  that  the  exterior  face  of  the  earth-ball  is  a completely  insulated  re- 
gion of  natural  phenomena.  And,  secondly,  it  assumes  that  connexions  which 
are  not  comprehensible  by  the  means  at  present  available  to  the  human  con- 
sciousness — namely,  sensation  refined  by  instruments  and  thought  precised 
by  theory  — do  not  even  exist. 

It  will  be  the  characteristic  task  of  the  twentieth  century,  as  compared  with  v 

the  nineteenth,  to  get  rid  of  this  system  of  superficial  causality,  whose  roots 
reach  back  into  the  rationalism  of  the  Baroque  period,  and  to  put  in  its  place 
a pure  physiognomic.  We  are  sceptics  in  regard  to  any  and  every  mode  of 
thought  which  “ explains”  causally.  We  let  things  speak  for  themselves,  and 
confine  ourselves  to  sensing  the  Destiny  immanent  in  them  and  contemplating 
the  form-manifestations  that  we  shall  never  penetrate.  The  extreme  to  which 
we  can  attain  is  the  discovery  of  causeless,  purposeless,  purely  existent  forms 
underlying  the  changeful  picture  of  nature.  For  the  nineteenth  century  the 
word  “evolution”  meant  progress  in  the  sense  of  increasing  fitness  of  life  to 
purposes.  For  Leibniz  — whose  Protogaa  (1691),  a work  full  of  significant 
thought,  outlines,  on  the  basis  of  studies  made  in  the  Harz  silver-mines,  a 
picture  of  the  world's  intancy  that  is  Goethian  through  and  through  — and  for 
Goethe  himself  it  meant  fulfilment  in  the  sense  of  increasing  connotation  of 

^ For  the  special  sense  in  which  the  word  ** Civilization*’  is  used  throughout  this  work  see 
VoL  I,  p.  31.  Briefly,  the  Civilization  is  the  outcome  of  the  Culture  of  which  it  is  in  one  sense  the 
final  phase,  but  in  another  the  distinct  and  unlike  sequel.  — Tr. 

2 Christian  Leopold  von  Buch,  1774-1853;  Cuvier,  — Tr. 


5x,„  . THE,  DECLINE. OF  THE  WE.ST.  , 

the  fbm*  . ,'  The  ..two . concepts,  Goethe's  form-fulfilment  and  Darwin’s  evolu- 
tion, arc  in  as  complete  oppositio.n  as  destiny  to  causality,  and  (be  it  added j 
as  German  to  .English' thought,  and  German  to  English  history. 

: There  is  no  more  conclusive  refutationof  Darwinism,  than  that  fEmis,hcd  by 
pateontology.  Simple  probability  indicates  that  fossil  hoards  can  only  be 
test  samples.^  Each  sample,  then,  should  represent  a diffe,rent  stage  of  evolu- 
tion,' and  there  ought  to-be  merely  ’‘transitional"  types,  no  definition  and  no 
species.  Instead  of  this  we  find  perfectly  stable  and  unaltered  forms  fcrsever- 
ing  through  long  ages,  forms  that  have  not  developed  themselves  on  the  fitness 
principle,  but  appear  suddenly  and  at  once  in  their  definitive  shape;  that  do  not 
thereafter  evolve  towards  better  adaptation,  but  become  rarer  and  finally 
disappear,  while  quite  different  forms  crop  up  again.  What  unfolds  itself,  in 
ever-increasing  richness  of  form,  is  the  great  classes  and  kinds  of  living  beings 
which  exist  abori^nally  and  exist  stilly  without  transition  types,  in  the  grouping 
of  to-day.  We  see  how,  amongst  fish,  the  Selachians,  with  their  simple  form, 
appear  first  in  the  foreground  of  history  and  then  slowly  fade  out  again,  while 
the  Teleostians  slowly  bring  a more  perfected  fish-type  to  predominance.  The 
same  applies  to  the  plant-world  of  the  ferns  and  horsetails,  of  wdiich  only  the 
last  species  now  linger  in  the  fully  developed  kingdom  of  the  flowering  plants 
But  the  assumption  of  utility-causes  or  other  visible  causes  for  these  phe- 
nomena has  no  support  of  actuality.^  It  is  a Destiny  that  evoked  into  the  world 
life  as  life,  the  ever-sharper  opposition  between  plant  and  animal,  each  single 
type,  each  genus,  and  each  species.  And  along  with  this  existence  there  is 
given  also  a dcRnitc  energy  of  the  form  — by  virtue  of  which  in  the  course  of 
its  self-fulfilment  it  keeps  itself  pure  or,  on  the  contrary,  becomes  dull  and 
unclear  or  evasively  splits  into  numerous  varieties  — and  finally  a life-duration 
of  this  form,  which  (unless,  again,  incident  intervenes  to  shorten  it)  leads  natu- 
rally to  a senility  of  the  species  and  finally  to  its  disappearance. 

As  for  mankind,  discoveries  of  the  Diluvial  age  indicate  more  and  more 
pointedly  that  the  man-forms  existing  then  correspond  to  those  living  now; 
there  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  evolution  towards  a race  of  greater  utilitarian 
“ fitness. And  the  continued  failure  to  find  man  in  the  Tertiary  discoveries  indi- 
cates more  and  more  clearly  that  the  human  life-form,  like  tverj  other,  originates 
in  a sudden  mutation  (Wandlun£)  of  which  the  “whence,"  “ how,"  and  “why" 
remain  an  impenetrable  secret.  If,  indeed,  there  were  evolution  in  the  English 
sense  of  the  word,  there  could  be  neither  defined  earth-strata  nor  specific  an- 
imal-classes, but  only  a single  geological  mass  and  a chaos  of  living  singular 
forms  which  we  may  suppose  to  have  been  left  over  from  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence. But  all  that  we  see  about  us  impels  us  to  the  conviction  that  again  and 

^ The  first  proof  that  the  basic  forms  of  plants  and  animals  did  not  evolve,  but  were  suddenly 
there,  was  given  by  H.  de  Vries  in  his  MMtatim  Theory  (1886).  In  the  language  of  Goethe,  we  see 
how  the  “impressed  form”  [Sec  VoL  I,  p.  157.  — Tr.]  works  itself  out  in  the  individual  samples, 
but  not  how  the  die  was  cut  for  the  whole  genus. 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  33 

agaifl  profound  and  very  suddcii  changes  take  place  in  the  being  of  plants  and 
animals,  changes  which  are  of  a cosmic  kind  and  nowise  restricted  to  the  earth’s 
surface,  which  are  beyond  the  ken  of  human  sense  and  understanding  in  respect 
of  causes,  if  not  indeed  in  ail  respects.^  So,  too,  we  observe  that  swift  and  deep 
changes  assert  themselves  in  the  history  of  the  great  Cultures,  without  as- 
signable causes,  influences,  or  purposes  of  any  kind.  The  Gothic  and  the 
Pyramid  styles  come  into  full  being  as  suddenly  as  do  the  Chinese  imperialism 
of  Shi-hwang-ti  and  the  Roman  of  Augustus,  as  Hellenism  and  Buddhism  and 
Islam.  It  is  exactly  the  same  with  the  events  in  the  individual  life  of  every 
person  who  counts  at  all,  and  he  who  is  ignorant  of  this  knows  nothing  of  men 
and  still  less  of  children.  Every  being,  active  or  contemplative,  strides  on  to  its 
fulfilment  by  epochs  and  we  have  to  assume  just  such  epochs  in  the  history  of 
solar  systems  and  the  world  of  the  fixed  stars.  The  origins  of  the  earth,  of  life, 
of  the  free-moving  animal  are  such  epochs,  and,  therefore,  mysteries  that  we 
can  do  no  more  than  accept.^ 

IV 

That  which  we  know  of  man  divides  clearly  into  two  great  ages  of  his  being. 
The  first  is,  as  far  as  our  view  is  concerned,  limited  on  the  one  side  by  that 
profound  fugue  of  planetary  Destiny  which  we  call  the  beginning  of  the  Ice 
Age  — and  about  which  we  can  (within  the  picture  of  world-history)  say  no 
more  than  that  a cosmic  change  took  place  — and  on  the  other  by  the  beginnings 
of  high  cultures  on  Nile  and  Euphrates,  with  which  the  whole  meaning  of 
human  existence  became  suddenly  different.  We  discover  everywhere  the  sharp 
frontier  of  Tertiary  ^nd  Diluvial,  and  on  the  hither  side  of  it  we  see  man  as  a 
completely  formed  type,  familiar  with  custom,  myth,  wit,  ornament,  and 
technique  and  endowed  with  a bodily  structure  that  has  not  materially  altered 
up  to  the  present  day. 

We  will  consider  the  first  age  as  that  of  the  primitive  Culture.  The  only 
field  in  which  this  Culture  endured  throughout  the  second  age  (though  cer- 
tainly in  a very  “late’’  form)  and  is  found  alive  and  fairly  intact  to-day  is 
north-west  Africa.  It  is  the  great  merit  of  Leo  Frobenius  ^ that  he  recognized 
this  quite  clearly,  beginning  with  the  assumption  that  in  this  field  a whole 
world  of  primitive  life  (and  not  merely  a greater  or  less  number  of  primitive 
tribes)  remained  remote  from  the  influences  of  the  high  Cultures.  The  ethnolo- 

^ With  this  it  becomes  unnecessary  to  postulate  vast  periods  of  time  for  the  original  states  of 
man,  and  we  can  regard  the  interval  between  the  oldest  man-type  hitherto  discovered  and  the  be- 
ginning of  the  Egyptian  Culture  as  a span,  greater  indeed,  but  certainly  not  unthinkably  greater, 
than  the  5,000  years  of  recognized  cultural  history. 

2 It  is  perhaps  not  unnecessary  to  remark  that  the  word  ‘"epoch”  is  used  throughout  this  book 
in  its  proper  sense  of  ‘ * turning  point”  or  * ‘ moment  of  change”  and  not  in  the  loose  sense  of  ‘ * period” 
which  it  has  acquired.  — Tr. 

® Und  Afrika  Sprach  (1911);  Faideuma,  Umrisse  eimr  Kaltitr-  und  Sedmkhre  (1920).  Frobenius 
distinguishes  three  ages. 


34  . THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

gist-psfchologist,  .on  the  contrary,  delights  in  collecting,  .from  all  OTcr  the 
five:  continents,  fragments  of  ,|)eoples  who  really  have  nothing  in  com.mon  but 
the  negative  fact  of  living  a subordinate  existence  in  the  middle  of  one  or 
another  of  the  high  Cnitures,  without  participation  in  its  inner  life.  The 
result  is  a congeries  of  tribes,  some  stationary,  some  inferior,  and  some  de- 
cadent, ^ whoso  respective  modes  of  expression,  moreover,  are  indiscriminately 
lumped  together. 

But  the  primitive  Culture  is  not  fragmentary,  but  something  s^rmg  and 
integral^  something  highly  vital  and  cfFectuaL  Only,  this  Culture  is  so  different 
from  everything  that  we  men  of  a higher  Culture  possess  in  the  way  of  spiritual 
potentialities  that  we  may  question  whether  even  chose  people  which  have 
carried  the  first  age  very  deep  into  the  second  are  good  evidence,  in  their  present 
modes  of  being  and  waking-being,  for  the  condition  of  the  old  time. 

For  some  thousands  of  years  now  the  waking-consciousness  of  man  has 
had  the  impression  of  constant  mutual  touch  between  the  tribes  and  peoples 
as  an  obvious  everyday  fact.  But  in  dealing  with  the  first  age  we  must  not 
forget  that  in  it  man,  cohering  in  a very  few  small  groups,  is  completely  lost 
in  the  immensity  of  the  landscape,  the  ruling  element  therein  being  the  mighty 
masses  of  the  great  animal-herds.  The  rarity  of  our  finds  sufficiently  proves 
this.  At  the  time  of  Aurignacian  Man  there  were  perhaps  a dozen  hordes, 
each  a few  hundred  strong,  wandering  in  the  whole  area  of  France,  and  such 
hordes  must  have  regarded  it  as  a deeply  impressive  and  puzzling  event  when 
(if  ever)  they  became  aware  that  fellow  men  existed.  Can  we  imagine  even 
in  the  least  degree  what  it  was  to  live  in  a world  almost  empty  of  men  — we 
for  whom  all  nature  has  long  since  become  a background  for  the  human  multi- 
tude? How  man's  world-consciousness  must  have  changed  when,  besides  the 
forests  and  the  herds  of  beasts,  other  men  “just  like  himself”  began  to  be  met 
with,  more  and  more  frequently,  in  the  country-side.  The  increase  of  man’s 
numbers  — this,  toq,  doubtless  took  place  very  suddenly  — made  experience 
of  “fellow  men”  habitual,  and  replaced  the  impression  of  astonishment  by  the 
feelings  of  pleasure  or  hostility,  and  these  again  evoked  a whole  new  world  of 
experiences  and  of  involuntary  and  inevitable  relations.  It  was  for  the  history 
of  the  human  soul  perhaps  the  deepest  and  most  pregnant  of  all  events.  It 
was  in  relation  to  alien  life-forms  that  man  first  became  conscious  of  his  own, 
and  now  the  interior  organization  of  the  clan  was  enriched  by  a wealth  of 
intertribal  forms  of  relation,  which  thereafter  completely  dominated  primitive 
life  and  thought.  For  it  was  then  that,  out  of  very  simple  modes  of  sensuous 
understanding,  the  rudiments  of  verbal  language  (and,  therefore,  of  abstract 
thought)  came  into  being,  amongst  them  the  particularly  fortunate  few,  which 
— though  we  can  form  no  idea  of  their  structure  — we  may  assume  as  the 
origins  of  the  later  Indogermanic  and  Semitic  language-groups. 

Then,  out  of  this  general  primitive  Culture  of  a humanity  linked  by  inter- 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  ^ 35 

tribal  feiations,  there  shot  up  suddenly  (about  3000  b.c.^)  the  Culture  of  Egypt 
and  Babylonia.  Probably  for  a millennium  before  that  date  both  these  fields 
bad  been  nursing  something  that  differed  radically  from  every  primitive  Culture 
in  kind  and  in  intent,  something  having  an  inward  unity  common  to  all  its 
forms  of  expression  and  directional  in  all  its  life.  To  me  it  seems  highly  proba- 
ble that,  if  not  indeed  all  over  the  earth’s  surface,  at  any  rate  in  man’s  essence 
a change  was  accomplished  at  that  time;  and  if  so,  then  any  primitive  Culture 
worthy  of  the  name  that  is  still  found  living  later,  ever  dwindling,  in  the  midst 
of  higher  Cultures,  should  itself  be  something  different  from  the  Culture  of 
the  first  Age.  But,  with  reference  to  primitive  Culture  of  any  sort,  that  which 
I call  the  pre-Culture  (and  which  can  be  shown  to  occur  as  a uniform  process 
in  the  beginning  of  every  high  Culture)  is  something  different  in  kind,  some- 
thing entirely  new. 

In  all  primitive  existence  the  “it,”  the  Cosmic,  is  at  work  with  such  im- 
mediacy of  force  that  all  microcosmic  utterances,  whether  in  myth,  custom, 
technique,  or  ornament,  obey  only  the  pressures  of  the  very  instant.  For  us, 
there  are  no  ascertainable  rules  for  the  duration,  tempo,  and  course  of  develop- 
ment of  these  utterances.  We  observe,  say,  an  ornamental  form-language--' 
not  to  be  called  a style  ^ — ruling  over  the  population  of  a wide  area,  spread- 
ing, changing,  and  at  last  dying  out.  Alongside  this,  and  perhaps  with  quite 
different  fields  of  extension,  we  may  find  modes  of  fashioning  and  using  weap- 
ons, tribal  organizations,  religious  practices,  each  developing  in  a special  way 
of  its  own,  'v^^ith  epochal  points  of  its  own,  beginnings  and  ends  of  its  own, 
completely  influenced  by  other  form-domains.  When  in  some  prehistoric 
stratum  we  have  identified  an  accurately  known  type  of  pottery,  we  cannot 
safely  argue  from  it  to  the  customs  and  religion  of  the  population  to  which  it 
belonged.  And  if  by  chance  the  same  area  does  hold  for  a particular  form  of 
marriage  and,  say,  a certain  type  of  tattooing,  this  never  signifies  a common 
basic  idea  such  as  is  indicated,  for  example,  by  the  discovery  of  gunpowder 
and  that  of  perspective  in  painting.  No  necessary  connexions  come  to  light 
between  ornament  and  organization  by  age-classes,  or  between  the  cult  of  a god 
and  the  kind  of  agriculture  practised.  Development  in  these  cases  means 
always  some  developiAent  of  one  or  another  individual  aspect  or  trait  of  the 
primitive  Culture,  never  of  that  Culture  itself.  This,  as  I have  said  before,  is 
essentially  chaotic;  the  primitive  Culture  is  neither  an  organism  nor  a sum  of 
organisms. 

But  with  the  type  of  the  higher  Culture  this  “it”  gives  way  to  a strong  and 
ondiffused  tendency . Within  the  primitive  Culture  tribes  and  clans  are  the  only 
quickened  beings  — ofher  than  the  individual  men  of  course.  Here,  however,  the 
Culture  itself  is  such  a beings  Everything  primitive  is  a sum  — a sum  of  the 

^ This  work  appeared  before  the  discovery  of  the  Sumerian  (or  Pre-Sumerian)  tombs  of  Ur.  — Tr* 

» Sec  VoL  I,  p.  108.  — Tr. 


3,6  : ....  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST', 

expression-'fotms  of  primitive  groupings.  The  high  Culturcj  on  the  contrary, 
is  the  ■ waking-being  of  a single  huge  organism  which  makes  not  only  custom, 
myths,  technique,  and  ^ art,  but  the  very  peoples  and  classes  incorporated  in 
itself  the  vessels  of  one  single  form-language  and  one  single  history.  The 
oldest  speech  that  we  know  of  belongs  to -the  primitive  Culture,  and  has  lawless 
destinies  of  its  own  which  cannot  be  deduced  from  those  of,  say,  Ornament  or 
Marriage.  But  the  history  of  script  belongs  integrally  with  the  expression- 
history  of  the  several  higher  Cultures.  That  the  Egyptian,  Chinese,  Baby- 
lonian, and  Mexican  each  formed  a special  script  in  its  pre-Culmral  age  — that 
the  Indian  and  the  Classical  on  the  other  hand  did  not  do  so,  but  took  over 
(and  very  late)  the  highly  developed  writing  of  a Deighbouting  Civilization  — 
that  in  the  Arabian,  again,  every  new  religion  and  sect  immediately  formed 
its  particular  script  — all  these  are  facts  that  stand  in  a deeply  intimate  rela- 
tion to  the  generic  form-history  of  these  Cultures  and  its  inner  significance. 

To  these  two  ages  our  knowledge  of  man  is  restricted,  and  they  certainly  do 
not  suffice  to  justify  conclusions  of  any  sort  about  possible  or  certain  new  eras 
or  about  their  “when’*  and  *'how’* — quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  in  any 
case  the  cosmic  connexions  that  govern  the  history  of  man  as  a genus  arc  en- 
tirely inaccessible  to  our  measures. 

My  kind  of  thought  and  observation  is  limited  to  the  physiognomy  of  the 
actual.  At  the  point  when  the  experience  of  the  “judge  of  men”  his 

environment,  and  that  of  the  “man  of  action”  ms-h-vis  his  facts,  become  in- 
effective, there  also  this  insight  finds  its  limit.  The  existence* of  these  two 
ages  is  a fact  of  historical  experience;  more,  our  experiencing  of  the  primitive 
Culture  consists  not  only  in  surveying,  in  its  relics,  a self-contained  and  closed- 
off  thing,  but  also  in  reacting  to  its  deeper  meaning  by  virtue  of  an  inward 
relation  to  it  which  persists  in  us.  But  the  second  age  opens  to  us  another  and 
quite  different  kind  of  experience.  It  was  an  incident,  the  sense  of  whidi 
cannot  now  be  scrutinized,  that  the  type  of  the  higher  Culture  appeared  sud- 
denly in  the  field  of  human  history.  Quite  possibly,  indeed,  it  was  some 
sudden  event  in  the  domain  of  earth-history  that  brought  forth  a new  and 
different  form  into  phenomenal  existence.  But  the  fact  that  we  have  before  us 
eight  such  Cultures,  all  of  the  same  build,  the  same  ""development,  and  the 
same  duration,  justifies  us  in  looking  at  them  comparatively^  and  therefore  justifies 
our  treating  them  as  comparable,  studying  them  comparatively,  and  obtaining 
from  our  study  a knowledge  which  we  can  extend  backwards  over  lost  periods 
and  forwards  over  the  future  — provided  always  that  a Destiny  of  a different 
order  does  not  replace  this  form-world,  suddenly  and  basically,  fay  another. 
Our  licence  to  proceed  thus  comes  from  general  experience  of  organic  being. 
As  in  the  history  of  the  Raptores  or  the  Coniferas  we  cannot  prophesy  whether 
and  when  a new  species  will  arise,  so  in  that  of  Cultural  history  we  cannot  say 
whether  and  when  a new  Culture  shall  be.  But  from  the  moment  when  a 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  ^ 

new  being  is  conceived  in  the  womb,  or  a seed  sinks  into  the  earth,  we  do  know 
the  inmr  farm  &f  this ^ new  life-cowse;  and  we  know  that  the  quiet  course  of  its 
development  and  fulfilment  may  be  disturbed  by  the  pressure  of  external  powers, 
but  never  altered. 

This  experience  teaches,  further,  that  the  Civilization  which  at  this  present 
time  has  gripped  the  earth’s  whole  surface  is  not  a third  age,  but  a stage  — a 
necessary  stage  — of  the  Western  Culture,  distinguished  from  its  analogues 
only  by  the  forcefulness  of  its  extension-tendency.  Here  experience  ends, 
and  all  speculation  on  what  new  forms  will  govern  the  life  of  future  mankind 
(or,  for  that  matter,  whether  there  will  be  any  such  new  forms)  all  building  of 
majestic  card-houses  on  the  foundation  of  ‘*it  should  be,  it  shall  be”  is  mere 
trifling  — far  too  futile,  it  seems  to  me,  to  justify  one  single  life  of  any  value 
being  expended  on  it. 

The  group  of  the  high  Cultures  is  not,  as  a group,  an  organic  unit.  That 
they  have  happened  in  just  this  number,  at  just  these  places  and  times,  is,  for 
the  human  eye,  an  incident  without  deeper  intelligibility.  The  ordering  of 
the  individual  Cultures,  on  the  contrary,  has  stood  out  so  distinctly  th^t  the 
historical  technique  of  the  Chinese,  the  Magian,  and  the  Western  worlds  — 
often,  indeed,  the  mere  common  consent  of  the  educated  in  these  Cultures  — 
has  been  able  to  fashion  a set  of  names  upon  which  it  would  be  impossible  to 
improve.^ 

Historical  thought,  therefore,  has  the  double  task  of  dealing  comparatively 
with  the  individual  life-courses  of  the  Cultures,  and  of  examining  the  incidental 
and  irregular  relations  of  the  Cultures  amongst  themselves  in  respect  of  their 
meaning.  The  necessity  of  the  first  of  these  tasks,  obvious  enough,  has  yet 
been  overlooked  hitherto.  The  second  has  been  handled,  but  only  by  the  lazy 
and  shallow  method  of  imposing  causality  over  the  whole  tangle  and  laying 
it  out  tidily  along  the  “course”  of  a hypothetical  “world ’’-history,  thereby 
making  it  impossible  to  discover  either  the  psychology  of  these  difficult,  but 
richly  suggestive,  relations  or  to  discover  that  of  the  inner  life  of  any  particular 
Culture.  In  truth,  the  condition  for  solving  the  first  problem  is  that  the  second 
has  been  solved  already.  The  relations  are  very  different,  even  under  the  simple 
aspect  of  time  and  space.  The  Crusades  brought  a Springtime  face  to  face  with 
an  old  and  ripe  Civilization;  in  the  Crctan-Mycenasan  world  seed-time  and 
golden  autumn  are  seen  together.  A Civilization  may  stream  over  from  im- 
mense remoteness,  as  the  Indian  streamed  into  the  Arabian  from  the  East,  or 
lie  senile  and  stifling  over  an  infancy,  as  the  Classical  lay  upon  its  other  side. 
But  there  are  differences,  too,  of  kind  and  strength;  the  Western  Culture  seeks 
out  relations,  the  Egyptian  tries  to  avoid  them;  the  former  is  beaten  by  them 

^ Goethe,  in  his  little  essay  has  characterized  the  four  parts  of  a Culture  — its 

preliminary,  early,  late,  and  civilized  stages  — with  such  a depth  of  insight  that  even  today  there  is 
nothing  to  add.  See  the  tables  at  the  end  of  Vol.  I,  which  agree  with  this  exactly. 


,38,.  , .THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  , 

again  and  again  in  tragic.crises.  whiie  the  Classical  gets  all  it  can  out  of  them* 
without  suffering.  But  ail  these  tendencies  have  their  roots  in  the  spirituality 
of  the  Culture  itself  — and  sometimes  they  tell  us  more  of  this  Culture  than  docs 
its  own  language,  which  often  hides  more  than  it  communicates. 

V 

A glance  over  the  group  of  the  Cultures  discloses  task  after  task.  The 
nineteenth  century,  in  which  historical  research  was  guided  by  natural  science, 
and  historical  thought  by  the  ideas  of  the  Baroque,  has  simply  brought  us 
to  a pinnacle  whence  we  sec  the  new  world  at  our  feet-  Shall  wc  ever  take 
possession  of  that  new  world? 

Even  ■.  to-day  uniform  treatment  of  these  grand  life-courses  is  immensely 
difScult,  because  the  more  remote  fields  have  not  been  seriously  worked  up  at 
all.  Once  more,  it  is  the  lordly  outlook  of  the  West  European  — he  will  only 
notice  that  which  approaches  him  from  one  or  another  antiquity  by  the  proper 
and  respectful  route  of  a Middle  Age,  and  that  which  goes  its  own  ways  will 
get  But  little  of  his  attention.  Thus,  of  the  things  of  the  Chinese  and  the 
Indian  worlds,  certain  kinds  are  now  beginning  to  be  tackled  — art,  religion, 
philosophy  — but  the  political  history  is  dealt  with,  if  at  all,  chattily/* 
It  does  not  occur  to  anyone  to  treat  the  great  constitutional  problems  of  Chi- 
nese history  — the  Hohenstaufen-destiny  of  the  Li-Wang  C84z),  the  first 
Congress  of  Princes  (659),  the  struggle  of  principle  between  the  imperialism 
(Lien-heng)  of  the  '‘Roman**  state  of  Tsin  and  the  Leaguc-of-Nations  idea 
(Ho-tsung)  between  500  and  300,  the  rise  of  the  Chinese  Augustus,  Hwang-ti 
(xii)  — with  anything  of  the  thoroughness  that  Mommsen  devoted  to  the 
principate  of  Augustus.  India,  again;  however  completely  the  Indians  them- 
selves have  forgotten  their  state-history,  wc  have  after  all  more  available  ma- 
terial for  Buddha*s  time  than  we  have  for  history  of  the  Classical  ninth  and 
eighth  centuries,  and  yet  even  to-day  we  act  as  though  “the**  Indian  had  lived 
entirely  in  his  philosophy,  just  as  the  Athenians  (so  our  classicists  would 
have  us  believe)  spent  their  lives  in  beauty-philosophizing  on  the  banks  of  the 
Ilissus.  But  even  Egyptian  politics  receive  little  reflective  attention.  The 
later  Egyptian  historian  concealed  under  the  name  “Hyksos  period**  the  same 
crisis  which  the  Chinese  treat  of  under  the  name  " Period  of  the  Contending 
States’*  — here,  too,  is  something  never  yet  investigated.  And  interest  in  the 
Arabian  world  has  reached  to  the  frontier  of  the  Classical  tongues  and  no 
further.  With  what  endless  assiduity  we  have  described  the  constitution  of 
Diocletian,  and  assembled  material  for  the  entirely  unimportant  administrative 
history  of  the  provinces  of  Asia  Minor  — because  it  is  written  in  Greek.  But 
the  Sassanid  state,  the  precedent  and  in  every  respect  the  model  of  Diocletian’s, 
comes  into  the  picture  only  occasionally,  and  then  as  Rome’s  oppmnt  in  war. 
What  about  its  own  administrative  and  juristic  history?  What  is  the  poor 


THE  /GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  39 

sum-total  of  material  that  we  have  assembled  for  the  law  and  economics  of 
Egypt,  India,  and  China  ^ in  comparison  with  the  work  that  has  keen  done  on, 
Greek' and  Roman  law.  . 

About  3000  2 after  a long  ‘‘Merovingian**  period,  which  is  still  distinctly 
perceptible  in  Egypt,  the  two  oldest  Cultures  began,  in  exceedingly  limited 
areas  on  the  lower  Nile  and  the  lower  Euphrates.  In  these  cases  the  distinc- 
tions between  early  and  late  periods  have  long  ago  been  labelled  as  Old  and 
Middle  Kingdom,  Sumer  and  Akkad.  The  outcome  of  the  Egyptian  feudal 
period  marked  by  the  establishment  of  a hereditary  nobility  and  the  decline 
(from  Dynasty  VI)  of  the  older  Kingship,  presents  so  astounding  a similarity 
with  the  course  of  events  in  the  Chinese  springtime  from  I-Wang  (934-909) 
and  that  in  the  Western  from  the  Emperor  Henry  IV  (1056-1106)  that  a unified 
comparative  study  of  all  three  might  well  be  risked.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
Babylonian  “Baroque**  we  see  the  figure  of  the  great  Sargon  (1500),  who 
pushed  out  to  the  Mediterranean  coast,  conquered  Cyprus,  and  styled  himself, 
like  Justinian  I and  Charles  V,  “lord  of  the  four  parts  of  the  earth.**  And  in 
due  course,  about  1800  on  the  Nile  and  rather  earlier  in  Sumer-Akkad,  we  per- 
ceive the  beginnings  of  the  first  Civilizations.  Of  these  the  Asiatic  displayed 
immense  expansive  power.  The  “achievements  of  the  Babylonian  Civiliza- 
tion** (as  the  books  say),  many  things  and  notions  connected  with  measuring, 
numbering,  and  accounting,  travelled  probably  as  far  as  the  North  and  the 
Yellow  Seas.  Many  a Babylonian  trademark  upon  a tool  may  have  come  to  be 

^ Another  blank  is  the  history  of  the  coontrysidc  or  landscape  (i.e.,  of  the  soil,  with  its  plant- 
tnantie  and  its  weathering)  in  which  man’s  history  has  been  staged  for  five  thousand  years.  And 
yet  man  has  so  painfully  wrested  himself  fi:om  the  history  of  the  landscape,  and  withal  is  so  held 
to  it  still  by  myriad  fibres,  that  without  it  life,  soul,  and  thought  are  inconceivable. 

So  fat  as  concerns  the  South-European  field,  from  the  end  of  the  Ice  Age,  a hitherto  rank 
luxuriance  gradually  gave  place  in  the  plant-world  to  poverty.  In  the  course  of  the  successive 
Egyptian,  Classical,  Arabian,  and  Western  Cultures,  a climatic  change  developed  all  around  the 
Mediterranean,  which  resulted  in  the  peasant’s  being  compelled  to  fight  no  longer  against  the  plant- 
world,  but  jor  it  — first  against  the  primeval  forest  and  then  against  the  desert.  In  Hannibal’s 
time  the  Sahara  lay  very  far  indeed  to  the  south  of  Carthage,  but  today  it  already  penetrates  to 
northern  Spain  and  Italy.  Where  was  it  in  the  days  of  the  pytamid-buildcrs,  who  depicted  sylvan 
and  hunting  scenes  in  their  reliefs?  When  the  Spaniards  expelled  the  Moriscos,  their  countryside  of 
woods  and  ploughland,  already  only  artificially  maintained,  lost  its  character  altogether,  and  the 
towns  became  oases  in  the  waste.  In  the  Roman  period  such  a result  could  not  have  ensued. 

® The  new  method  of  comparative  morphology  affords  us  a safe  test  of  the  datings  which  have 
been  arrived  at  by  other  means  for  the  beginnings  of  past  Cultures.  The  same  kind  of  argument 
which  would  prevent  us,  even  in  the  absence  of  positive  information,  from  dating  Goethe’s  birth 
more  than  a century  earlier  than  the  Urfaust,**  or  supposing  the  career  of  Alexander  the  Great  to 
have  been  that  of  an  elderly  man,  enables  us  to  demonstrate,  from  the  individual  characteristics  of 
their  political  life  and  the  spirit  of  their  art,  thought,  and  religion,  that  the  Egyptian  Culture  dawned 
somewhere  about  300b  and  the  Chinese  about  1400.  The  calculations  of  French  investigators  and 
more  recently  of  Borchardt  O^ie  Annalen  und  dk  XfitUche  'pestkgung  des  Alten  Ketches,  1919)  are  as  un- 
sound intrinsically  as  those  of  Chinese  historians  for  the  legendary  Hsia  and  Shang  dynasties. 
Equally,  it  is  impossible  that  the  Egyptian  calendar  shquld  have  been  introduced  in  4x41  b.c.  As 
in  every  chronology  we  have  to  allow  that  evolution  has  been  accompanied  by  radical  calendar 
changes,  the  attempt  to  fix  the  exact  starting-date  a pstermi  is  objectless. 


40;  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

lioGOUfcd/Oiit,  therein  the  Germanic  wild,  as  a magic  symbol,  and  so  may  have 
originated , some  “Early-German*’  ornament.  But  meantime  the  Babylonian 
realm  itself  passed  from  hand  to  hand.  Kassites,  Assyrians,  Chaldeans,  Modes, 
Persians,, ..Macedonians  — all  of  these  small  ^ warrior-hosts  under  energetic 
leaders, — .successively  replaced  one  another  in  the  capital  city  without  any 
serions  resistance  on  the  part  of  its  people. 

It  is: a first  example  — soon  paralleled  in' Egypt  — of  the  “Roman  Empire” 
style.  Under  the  . Kassites  rulers  were  set  up  and  displaced  by  praetorians; 
the  Assyrians,  like  the  later  soldier-emperors  of  Rome  (after  Commodus), 
maintained  the  old  constitutional  forms;  the  Persian  Cyrus  and  the  Ostrogoth 
Theodoric  regarded  themselves  as  managers  of  the  Empire,  and  the  warrior 
bands,  Medc  and  Lombard,  as  master-peoples  in  alien  surroundings.  But 
these  are  constitutional  rather  than  factual  distinctions;  in  intent  and  purpose 
the  legions  of  Septimius  Severus,  the  African,  did  not  differ  from  the  \isigoths 
of  Alaric,  and  by  the  battle  of  Adrianople  ^ “Romans”  and  “barbarians” 
have  become  almost  indistinguishable. 

After  1500  three  new  Cultures  begin  — first,  the  Indian,  in  the  upper 
Punjab;  then,  a hundred  years  later,  the  Chinese  on  the  middle  Hvrang-Ho; 
and  then,  about  1100,  the  Classical,  on  the  iEgean  Sea.  The  Chinese  historians 
speak  of  the  three  great  dynasties  of  Hsia,  Shang,  and  Chou  in  much  the  same 
way  as  Napoleon  regarded  himself  as  a fourth  dynasty  following  the  Mero- 
vingians, the  Carolingians,  and  the  Capetians  — in  reality,  the  third  coexisted 
with  the  Culture  right  through  its  course  in  each  case.  When  in  441  b.c.  the 
titular  Emperor  of  the  Ch6u  dynasty  became  a state  pensioner  of  the  “Eastern 
Duke”  and  w’^hen  in  a.d.  1793  “Louis  Capet”  was  executed,  the  Culture  in 
each  case  passed  into  the  Civilization.  There  arc  some  bronzes  of  very  great 
antiquity  preserved  from  late  Chang  times,  which  stand  towards  the  later  art 
in  exactly  the  same  relation  as  Mycenaean  to  Early  Classical  pottery  and  Caro- 
lingian  to  Romanesque  art.  In  the  Vedic,  Homeric,  and  Chinese  springtimes, 
with  their  **  Pfal^en*  and  Burgen,**  their  knighthood  and  feudal  rulership, 
can  be  seen  the  whole  image  of  our  Gothic,  and  the  “period  of  the  Great 
Protectors”  (Ming-Chu,  685-691)  corresponds  precisely  to  the  time  of  Crom- 
well, Wallenstein,  and  Richelieu  and  to  the  First  Tyranois  of  the  Greek  world. 

The  period  480-2.30  is  called  by  the  Chinese  historians  the  “Period  of  the 
Contending  States”;  it  culminated  in  a century  of  unbroken  warfare  between 

^ Eduard  Meyer  (Cesch,  d.  Akermms,  III,  97)  estimates  the  Persians,  probably  too  highly,  at 
half  a million  as  against  the  fifty  millions  of  the  Babylonian  Empire,  The  numerical  relation  be- 
tween the  Germanic  peoples  and  legions  of  the  third-century  Roman  emperors  and  the  Roman  popu- 
lation as  a whole,  and  that  of  the  Ptolemaic  and  Roman  armies  to  that  of  the  Egyptian  people,  was 
of  much  the  same  order. 

[H.  Delbriick,  in  his  well-known  Gesch,  der  Krieg^kunst  (1908),  VoL  I,  Part  I,  chapter  1,  and  else- 
where, deals  in  considerable  detail  with  the  strengths  of  ancient  armi<^.  — Tr.] 

2 A.D.  378.  Sec  C.  W.  C.  Oman,  History  of  tbt  Art  of  War:  MiddU  Aps  (1898),  ch.  i;  H.  Del- 
briick,  Gtsch.  dcr  Krugshunst^  Vol.  H,  hook  I ch.  x,  and  book  11.  — Tr. 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  /41 

mass-armies  with  frightful  social  upheavals,  and  out  of  it  came  the  “ Romao  V' 
state  of  Tsiu  as  founder  of  a Chinese  Imperium,  This  phase  Egypt  expefienced 
between  1780  and  1580,  of  which  the  last  century  was  the  “Hy ksos'V  time.- 
The  Classical  experienced  it  from  Chseronea  (338),  and,  at  the  high  pitch  of 
horror,  from  the  Gracchi  (133)  to  Actium  (31  b.c,).  And  it  is  the  destiny  of 
the  West-European-Amcrican  world  for  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries. 

During  this  period  the  centre  of  gravity  changes  — as  from  Attica  to 
Latium,  so  from  the  Hwang-ho  (at  Ho-nan-fu)  to  the  Yang-tse  (modern  prov- 
ince of  Hu-pei).  The  Si-Kiang  was  as  vague  for  the  Chinese  savants  of  those 
days  as  the  Elbe  for  the  Alexandrian  geographer,  and  of  the  existence  of  India 
they  had  as  yet  no  notion. 

As  on  the  other  side  of  the  globe  there  arose  the  principes  of  the  Julian- 
Claudian  house,  so  here  in  China  there  arose  the  mighty  figure  of  Wang-Cheng,  * 
who  led  Tsin  through  the  decisive  struggle  to  sole  supremacy  and  in  12.1  as- 
sumed the  title  of  Ti  (literally  equivalent  to  '‘Augustus*’)  and  the  Cassar- 
name  Hwang-ti.  He  founded  the  "'Fax Serica^*  as  we  may  call  it,  carried  out  a 
grand  social  reform  in  the  exhausted  Empire,  and  — as  promptly  as  Rome  ^ — 
began  to  build  his  "LimeSy\th.t  famous  Great  Wall,  for  which  in  xiq  he  an- 
nexed a part  of  Mongolia.  He  was  the  first,  too,  to  subdue  the  barbarians 
south  of  the  Yang-tse,  in  a series  of  large-scale  campaigns  followed  andmon- 
firmed  by  military  roads,  castles,  and  colonics.  But  “Roman,**  too,  was  his 
family  history — a Tacitean  drama  with  Lui-ti  (Chancellor  and  stepfather 
of  the  Emperor)  and  Li-Szu,  the  great  statesman  (the  Agrippa  of  his  day,  and 
unifier  of  the  Chinese  script),  playing  parts,  and  one  that  quickly  closed  in 
Neronic  horrors.  Followed  then  the  two  Han  dynasties  (Western,  zo6  b.c.- 
A.D.  X3;  Eastern,  a.b.  x5-xxo),  under  which  the  frontiers  extended  more  and 
more,  while  in  the  capital  eunuch-ministers,  generals,  and  soldiery  made  and 
unmade  the  rulers  at  their  pleasure.  At  certain  rare  moments,  as  under  Wu-ti 
(140-86)  and  Ming-ti  (58-76),  the  Chinese-Confucian,  the  Indian-Buddhist, 
and  the  Classical-Stoic  world-forces  approached  one  another  so  closely  in  the 
region  of  the  Caspian  that  they  might  easily  have  come  into  actual  touch.^ 

Chance  decreed  that  the  heavy  attacks  of  the  Huns  should  break  themselves 
in  vain  upon  the  Chinese  “Limes,**  which  at  each  crisis  found  a strong  emperor 
to  defend  it.  The  decisive  repulse  of  the  Huns  took  place  in  114-119  under  the 
Chinese  Trajan,  Wu-ti;  and  it  was  he,  too,  who  finally  incorporated  Southern 
China  m the  Empire,  with  the  object  of  obtaining  a route  into  India,  and  built 
a grand  embattled  road  to  the  Tarim.  And  so  the  Huns  turned  westward,  and 

1 In  the  case  of  Rome,  the  idea  of  a fixed  frontier  against  the  barbarian  emerged  soon  after  the 
defeat  of  Varus,  and  the  fortifications  of  the  Limes  were  laid  down  before  the  close  of  the  first 
century  of  our  era.  — Tr, 

2 For  at  that  time  imperialistic  tendencies  found  expression  even  in  India,  in  the  Maurya  and 
Sunga  dynasty;  these,  however,  could  only  be  confused  and  mcffectivc,  Indian  nature  being  what 
it  was. 


4z,,  ..THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

in,  due  coEtse  they  appear,  impelling  a swarm  of  Germanic  tribes,  in  face  of  the 
Limes  of  the  Roman  world.  This  time  they  succeeded.  The  Roman  Impcrium 
collapsed,  and  thus  two  only  of  the  three  empires  continued,  and  still  continue, 
as  desirable  spoil  for  a succession  of  different  powers.  To-day  it, is  the  ** red- 
haired  barbarian’*  of  the  West  who  is.  playing  before  the  highly  civilized  eyes 
of  Brahman  and  Mandarin  the  r6ic  once  played  by  .Mogul  and  Manchu,  playing 
it  ,neit.her  better  nor  worse  than  they,  and  certain  like  them  to  be  superseded  in 
due  course  by  other  actors.  But  in  the  colonization-field  of  foundering  Rome, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  future  Western  Culture  was  ripening  underground 
in  the  north-west,  while  in  the  east  the  Arabian  Culture  had  flowered  already. 
The -Arabian  Culture^  is  a discovery.  Its  unity  was  suspected  by  late 
Arabians,  but  it  has  so  entirely  escaped  Western  historical  research  that  not 
even  a satisfactory  name  can  be  found  for  it.  Conformably  to  the  dominant 
languages,  the  seed-time  and  the  spring  might  be  called  the  Aramaic  and  the 
later  time  the  Arabian,  but  there  is  no  really  effectual  name.  In  this  field  the 
Cultures  were  close  to  one  another,  and  the  extension  of  the  corresponding 
Civilizations  led  to  much  overlaying.  The  pre-Cultural  period  of  the  Arabian, 
which  we  can  follow  out  in  Persian  and  Jewish  history,  lay  completely  within 
the  area  of  the  old  Babylonian  world,  but  the  springtime  was  under  the  mighty 
spell  of  the  Classical  Civilization,  which  invaded  from  the  West  with  all  the 
power  of  a just-attained  maturity,  atid  the  Egyptian  and  Indian  Civilizations 
also  made  themselves  distinctly  felt.  And  then  in  turn  the  Arabian  spirit  — 
under  Late  Classical  disguises  for  the  most  part  — cast  its  spell  over  the  nascent 
Culture  of  the  West.  The  Arabian  Civilization  stratified  over  a still  surviving 
Classical  in  the  popular  soul  of  south  Spain,  Provence,  and  Sicily,  and  became 
the  model  upon  which  the  Gothic  soul  educated  itself.  The  proper  landscape 
of  this  Culture  is  remarkably  extended  and  singularly  fragmented.  Let  one 
put  oneself  at  Palmyra  or  Ctesiphon,  and,  musing,  look  outwards  all  round. 
In  the  north  is  Osrhoene;  Edessa  became  the  Florence  of  the  Arabian  spring. 
To  the  west  are  Syria  and  Palestine  — the  home  of  the  New  Testament  and  of 
the  Jewish  Mishna,  with  Alexandria  as  a standing  outpost.  To  the  cast  Maz- 
daism  experienced  a mighty  regeneration,  which  corresponded  to  the  birth  of 
Jesus  in  Jewry  and  about  which  the  fragmentary  state  of  Avesta  literature 
enables  us  to  say  only  that  it  happened.^  Here,  too,  were  born  the  Talmud  and 
the  religion  of  Mani.  Deep  in  the  south,  the  future  home  of  Islam,  an  age  of 
chivalry  was  able  to  develop  as  fully  as  in  the  realm  of  the  Sassanids;  even 
to-day  there  survive,  unexplored,  the  ruins  of  castles  and  strongholds  whence 
the  decisive  wars  were  waged  between  the  Christian  state  of  Axum  and  the 
Jewish  state  of  the  Himyarites  on  the  two  shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  with  Roman 

^ Chapters  vii~ix  below. 

^ Oa  the  Hstory  of  the  Avesta  see  Emy.  Brf#,,  XI  cd.,  articles  ** Zend-Avesta”  and  ‘*Zoroas^ 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  ' 43 

^and  Persian  diplomacy  poking  the  fire.  In  the  extreme  north  was  Byzantinm, 
that  strange  mixture  of  sere,  civilmed,  Ciassicai,:With  vernai  and  chevaleresqnc 
which  is  manifested  above  all  in  the  bewildering  history  of  the  Byaantine  army  • 
system.  Into  this  world  Islam  at  last  — and  far  too  late  — brought  a con- 
sciousness  of  unity,  and  this  accounts  for  the  self-evident  character  of  its  vic- 
torious progress  and  the  almost  unresisting  adhesion  of  Christians,  Jews,  and 
Persians  alike.  Out  of  Islam  in  due  course  arose  the  Arabian  Civilmtion 
which  was  at  the  peak  of  its  intellectuai  completeness  when  the  barbarians 
from  the  West  broke  in  for  a moment,  marching  on  Jerusalem.  How,  we  may 
ask  ourselves,  did  this  inroad  appear  in  the  eyes  of  cultivated  Arabians  of  the 
time?  Somewhat  like  Bolshevism,  perhaps?  For  the  statecraft  of  the  Arabian 
World  the  political  relations  of  ‘‘  Frankistan'*  were  something  on  a lower  plane. 
Even  in  our  Thirty  Years*  War  — from  that  point  of  view  a drama  of  the  “Far 
West**  — when  an  English  envoy  ^ strove  to  stir  up  the  Forte  against  the  house 
of  Habsburg,  the  statesman  who  handled  policy  over  a field  stretching  from 
Morocco  to  India,  evidently  judged  that  the  little  predatory  states  on  the 
horizon  were  of  no  real  interest.  And  even  when  Napoleon  landed  in  Egypt, 
there  were  still  many  without  an  inkling  of  the  future. 

Meantime  yet  another  new  Culture  developed  in  Mexico.  This  lay  so  remote 
from  the  rest  that  no  word  even  passed  between  them.  All  the  more  astonish- 
ing, therefore,  is  the  similarity  of  its  development  to  that  of  the  Classical.  No 
doubt  the  archaeologist  standing  before  a teocalii  would  be  horrified  to  think  of 
his  Doric  temple  in  such  a connexion;  yet  it  was  a thoroughly  Classical  trait 
— feebleness  of  the  will-to-powcr  in  the  matter  of  technics  — that  kept  the 
Aztecs  ill  armed  and  so  made  possible  their  catastrophe. 

For,  as  it  happens,  this  is  the  one  example  of  a Culture  ended  by  violent 
death.  It  was  not  starved,  suppressed,  or  thwarted,  but  murdered  in  the  full 
glory  of  its  unfolding,  destroyed  like  a sunflower  whose  head  is  struck  off  by 
one  passing.  All  these  states  — including  a world-power  and  more  than  one 
federation  — with  an  extent  and  resources  far  superior  to  those  of  the  Greek 
and  Roman  states  of  Hannibal’s  day;  with  a comprehensive  policy,  a carefully 
ordered  financial  system,  and  a highly  developed  legislation;  with  adminis- 
trative ideas  and  economic  tradition  such  as  the  ministers  of  Charles  V could 
never  have  imagined;  with  a wealth  of  literature  in  several  languages,  an 
intellectually  brilliant  and  polite  society  in  great  cities  to  which  the  West 
could  not  show  one  single  parallel  — all  this  was  not  broken  down  in  some 
desperate  war,  but  washed  out  by  a handful  of  bandits  in  a few  years,  and  so 

^ Sir  Thomas  Roc,  i6zo.  A similar  mission  went  to  Turkey  on  the  part  of  Frederick  and  the 
Bohemian  nobles  to  ask  for  assistance  and  to  justijfy  to  the  Turk  their  action  in  deposing  the  Habs- 
burg King.  The  answer  they  received  was  what  might  be  expected  of  a great  imperialist  power 
asked  to  intervene  in  the  affairs  of  lesser  neighbours  — namely,  material  guarantees  of  the  reality 
of  the  movement  it  was  asked  to  support  and  pledges  that  no  settlement  would  be  made  without 
its  agreement.  — Tr, 


44  „ : ' .■  '.'THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

entirely  that  thC' relics  of  the  population  retained  not  C¥cn  a, memory  of  it  all. 
Of  the  giant  city  Tcnochtitlan  ^ not  a stone  remains  above  ground.  The  cluster 
of  great  Mayan  cities  in  the  virgin  forests  of  Yucatan  succumbed,  swiftly  to  the 
attack  '0£  vegetation,  and  we  do  not  know,  the  old  namC'  of  any  one  of  them,. 
Of  the  literature  three  books  survive,  but  no  one  can  read  tlie,m. 

: /.The  most  appalling  feature  of  the  tragedy. was  that  it  was  not  in  the  least  a 
necessity  of  the  Western 'Culture  that  it  should  happen.  It  was  a private  affair 
of  adventurers,  and  at  the  time  no  one  in  Germany,  France,  or  England  had  any 
idea  of  what  was  taking  place.  This  instance  shows,  as  no  , other  shows,  that 
th'.  MsPofy  of  humanity  has  no  meaning  whatever  and  that  deep  significances  reside 
only  in  the  life-courses  of  the  separate  Cultures.  Their  inter-relations  are  un- 
important and'  accidental. , In  this  case  the  accident  w^as  so  cruelly  banal,  .so 
supremely  absurd,  ■ that  it  would  not  be-  tolerated  in  the  wildest  farce.  A few 
cannon  and  handguns  began  and  ended  the  drama. ^ 

A sure  knowledge  of  even  the  most  general  history  of  this  world  is  now  for 
ever  impossible.  Events  as  important  as  our  Crusades  and  Reformation  have 
vanished  without  leaving  a trace.  Only  in  recent  years  has  research  managed 
to  settle  the  outline,  at  any  rate,  of  the  later  course  of  development,  and  with 
the  help  of  these  data  comparative  morphology  may  attempt  to  widen  and 
deepen  the  picture  by  means  of  those  of  other  Cultures.®  On  this  basis  the 
epochal  points  of  this  Culture  lie  about  two  hundred  years  later  than  those  of 
the  Arabian  and  seven  hundred  years  before  those  of  our  own.  There  "was  a 
pre-Cultural  period  which,  as  in  China  and  Egypt,  developed  script  and  cal- 
endar, but  of  this  we  now  know  nothing.  The  time-reckoning  began  with  an 
initial  date  which  lies  far  behind  the  birth  of  Christ,  but  it  is  impossible  now  to 
fix  it  with  certainty  relative  to  that  event. ^ In  any  case,  it  shows  an  extraor- 
dinarily strongly  developed  history-sense  in  Mexican  mankind. 

The  springtime  of  the  “Hellenic**  Maya  states  is  evidenced  by  the  dated 
relief-pillars  of  the  old  cities  of  Copan  (in  the  south),  Tikal,  and  somewhat 
later  Chichen  Itza  (in  the  north),  Naranjo,  and  Seibal  ® — about  160-450. 

^ Mexico  City,  or,  better,  the  aggiomeration  of  towns  and  villages  in  the  valley  of  Mexico.  — Tr. 

^ According  to  Prescott,  Cortez’s  force  on  landing  had  thirteen  hand  Erearms  and  fourteen 
cannon,  great  and  small,  akogcthcf.  The  whole  of  these  were  lost  in  the  first  defeat  at  Mexico. 
Later  a pure  accident  gave  Cortez  the  contents  of  a supply-ship  from  Europe.  In  a military  sense 
horses  contributed  to  the  Spanish  victories  nearly  if  not  quite  as  much  as  firearms,  but  these,  too, 
were  in  small  numbers,  sixteen  at  the  outset.  — Tr, 

^ The  following  attempt  is  based  upon  the  data  of  two  American  works  — L,  Spence,  The  Civ%U%a^ 
tion  of  Ancient  Mexico  (Cambridge,  1911);  and  If . J.  Spinden,  Maya  Art:  Its  Subject  matter  and  His- 
torical Development  (Cambridge,  1913)  — which  independently  of  one  another  attempt  to  work 
out  the  chronology  and  which  reach  a certain  measure  of  agreement. 

^ Since  the  publication  of  the  German  original,  Spinden’s  further  researches  QAncimt  Civilit^tmis 
of  Mexico)  have  placed  the  historical  zero  date  at  613  b.c.  (and  the  cosmological  zero  of  back-reckoning 
3373  B-c.).  This  historical  zero  seems  to  lie  deep  in  the  pre-CuIturai  period,  if  later  events  have 
the  dates  given  in  the  text.  But  compare  Author's  note  on  p.  39.  — Tr. 

® These  are  the  names  of  near-by  villages  serving  as  labels;  the  true  names  are  lost. 


45 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES 

At,  the  cod  ,of  this  period  Chichen  Itza  was  a model  of  architecture  that  was : 
followed  for  centuries.  The  full  glory  of  Palenque  and  Piedras  Negras  (in  the 
west)  may  correspond' to  out  Late  Gothic  and  Renaissance  (450-600  ~ Euro- 
pean IX50-I400?):  In  the  Baroque  or  Late  period  Champutun  appears  as  the 
centre  of  style-formation,  and  now  the  ** Italic'*  Nahua  peoples  of  the  high 
plateau  of  Anahuac  began  to  come  under  the  cultural  influence.  Artisdcally 
and  spiriraaliy  these  peoples  were  mere  recipients,  but  in  their  political  in- 
stincts they  were  far  superior  to  the  Maya  (about  600-960,  = Classical  750- 
400  = Western  1400-1750?),  And  now  Maya  entered  on  the  “Hellenistic" 
phase.  About  960  Uxmal  was  founded,  soon  to  be  a cosmopolis  of  the  first 
rank,  an  Alexandria  or  Baghdad,  founded  like  these  on  the  threshold  of  the 
Cmlizatioii.  * With  it  we  find  a series  of  brilliant  cities  like  Labna,  Mayapan,  , 
Chacmultun,  and  a revived  Chichen  Itza.  These  places  mark  the  culminating 
point  of  a grandiose  architecture,  which  thereafter  produced  no  new  style, 
but  applies  the  old  motives  with  taste  and  discrimination  to  mighty  masses. 
Politically  this  is  the  age  of  the  celebrated  League  of  Mayapan,  an  alliance  of 
three  leading  states,  which  appears  to  have  maintained  the  position  successfully 
— if  somewhat  artificially  and  arbitrarily  ■ — in  spite  of  great  wars  and  repeated 
revolutions  (960-1165  = Classical  350-150  = Western  1800-1000). 

The  end  of  this  period  was  marked  by  a great  revolution,  and  with  it  the 
definitive  intervention  of  the  (“Roman")  Nahua  powers  in  the  Maya  affair. 
With  their  aid  Hunac  Ceel  brought  about  a general  overthrow  and  destroyed 
Mayapan  (about  1190  = Classical  150).  The  sequel  was  typical  of  the  history 
of  the  over-ripened  Civilization  in  which  different  peoples  contend  for  military 
lordship.  The  great  Maya  cities  sink  into  the  same  bland  contentment  as 
Roman  Athens  and  Alexandria,  but  out  on  the  horizon  of  the  Nahua  lands  was 
developing  the  last  of  these  ^peoples,  the  Aztecs  — young,  vigorous,  barbaric, 
and  filled  with  an  insatiable  will-to-power.  In  1315  (=  the  Age  of  Augustus) 
they  founded  Tenochtitlan,  which  soon  became  the  paramount  and  capital 
city  of  the  whole  Mexican  world.  About  1400  military  expansion  began  on 
the  grand  scale.  Conquered  regions  were  secured  by  military  colonies  and  a 
network  of  military  roads,  and  a superior  diplomacy  kept  the  dependent  states 
in  check  and  separated.  Imperial  Tenochtitlan  grew  enormous  and  housed  a 
cosmopolitan  population  speaking  every  tongue  of  this  world-empire.^  The 
Nahua  provinces  were  politically  and  militarily  secure,  the  southward  thrust 
was  developing  rapidly,  and  a hand  was  about  to  be  laid  on  the  Maya  states; 
there  is  no  telling  what  the  course  of  the  next  centuries  would  have  been.  And 
suddenly  — the  end. 

^ And  was  there  an  element  of  panem  et  circenses  in  the  mass-sacrifice  of  captives?  May  it  be  that 
the  acceptance  of  the  Spaniard  as  the  expected  manifestation  of  thl  goAQxiQtZ2i\co^t\Q  ^ redemt  Saturnia 
rtgna''),  and  the  serious  disputations  on  matters  of  religion  that  took  place  between  Montei:uma 
and  the  Christians,  were  presages  of  the  phase  which  Spcngler  calls  the  “Second  Religiousness” 
(see  below,  p.  310)  of  the  Civilization?  — Tn 


46  ■,  THE.  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

: At.  that  d.ate  the  West  was  at  a level  which  the  Maya  had  already  overpassed 
by  jQo;  iiothiag,  short  of  the  age  of  Frederick  the  Great  would  have  been  ripe 
.enough  to  comprehcGd  the  politics  of  the  Mayapan  League,  and  what  .the 
Aztecs  of,.A..D.  1500  were  organizing  lies  for  us  well  in  the  future.  But  that 
which  distinguished  Faustian  man,  even  then,  from  the  man  of  any  other 
Culture  was  his  irrepressible  urge  into  distance.  ^ It  was  this,  in  the  last  resort, 
that  killed,  and  even  ■ annihilated  the  Mexican,  and  Peruvian  Culture  — the 
unparalleled  drive  that  was  ready  for  service  in  any  and  every  domain.  Cer- 
tainly the  Ionic  style  was  imitated' in  Carthage  and  in  Persepoiis,  and  Hellen- 
istic taste  in  the  Gandara  art  of  India  found  admirers.  Future  investigation 
will  probably  find  some  Chinese  in  the  primitive  German  wood-arcliitccturc. 
The  Mosque  style  ruled  from  Farther  India  to  North  Russia,  to  West  Africa, 
and  to  Spain.  ' But  all  that  amounts  to  nothing  as  compared  with  the  expan- 
sion-power of  the  Western  Soul.  ■ The  true  style-history  of  that  soul,  it  need 
hardly  be  said,  accomplished  itself  only  on  the  mother  soil,  but  its  resultant 
effects  knew  no  bounds.  On  the  spot  where  Tenochtitlan  had  stood,  the  Span- 
iards erected  a Baroque  cathedral  adorned  with  masterpieces  of  Spanish  paint- 
ing and  plastic.  Already  at  that  date  the  Portuguese  had  got  to  work  in  Hither 
India  and  Late-Baroque  architects  from  Spain  and  Italy  in  the  heart  of  Poland 
and  Russia.  The  English  Rococo,  and  especially  Empire,  made  for  them- 
selves a broad  province  in  the  Plantation  States  of  North  America,  whose  won- 
derful rooms  and  furniture  are  far  less  well  known  in  Germany  than  they 
ought  to  be.  Classicism  was  at  work  already  in  Canada  and  at  the  Cape,  and 
presently  there  were  no  limits  at  ail.  It  was  just  the  same  in  every  other  domain 
of  form;  the  relation  between  this  forceful  young  Civilization  and  the  still 
remaining  old  ones  — is  that  it  covers  them,  all  alike,  with  ever-thickening 
layers  of  West-European-American  life-forms  under  which,  slowly,  the  ancient 
native  form  disappears. 

VI  ' 

In  the  presence  of  this  picture  of  the  world  of  man  — which  is  destined  to 
displace  the  older  one  of  TAncient-Mediasval-Modern"’  that  is  still  firmly 
established  even  in  the  best  minds  — it  will  become  possible,  too,  to  give  a 
new  answer  (and  for  our  Civilization,  I think,  a final  answer)  to  the  old  ques- 
tion: What  is  History? 

Ranke,  in  the  preface  of  his  W ofld  History  says:  “ History  only  begins  when 
the  monuments  become  intelligible,  and  trustworthy  written  evidences  are 
available."’  This  is  the  answer  of  a collector  and  arranger  of  data;  obviously, 
it  confuses  that  which  has  happened  with  that  which  happened  within  the 
field  of  view  open  at  the  particular  time  to  the  particular  student.  Mardonius 
was  defeated  at  Plataea  — has  this  ceased  to  be  history  if  two  thousand  years 
later  it  has  somehow  dropped  out  of  the  ken  of  the  historians?  For  a fact  to 
be  a fact,  must  it  be  mentioned  in  books? 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  47 

The  weightiest  historian  since' Ranke,,  Eduard  Meyer/  says:  Historic 
is  that  which  is,  or.  has  been,  cfFective.  . . Only  through  historical  treat-,, 
ment  docs  the  individual  process,  lifted  by  history  from  among  the  infinite. mass, 
of  contemporary  processes,  become- the  historical  event.”-  The  remark  is 
thoroughly  in  the  manner  and  spirit  of  Hegel.  Firstly,  its  starting-point  is 
the  fact  and  not  any  accidental  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  the  fact,  and  if  there 
is  any  mode  of  picturing  history  which  necessarily  imposes  such  a starting- 
point,  it  is  that  presented  in  these  pages,  since  it  compels  us  to  assume  the 
existence  of  facts  of  the  first  order  in  majestic  sequences,  even  when  we  do  not 
(and  never  will)  know  them  in  the  scientific  sense.  We  have  to  learn  to  handle 
the  unknown  in  the  most  comprehensive  way.  Secondly,  truths  exist  for  the 
mind,  facts  only  in  relation  to  life.  Historical  treatment  — in  my  terminology, 
fhysmgnomk  fad.’—  is  decided  by  the  Mood,  the  gift  of  judging  men  broadened 
out  into  past  and  future,  the  innate  flair  for  persons  and  situations,  for  the 
event,  for  that  which  had  to  be,  must  have  been.  It  does  not  consist  in  bare 
scientific  criticism  and  knowing  of  data.  The  scientific  mode  of  experience  is, 
for  every  true  historian,  something  additional  or  subordinate.  It  addresses  to 
the  waking-consciousness,  by  the  way  of  understanding  and  imparting,  labo- 
rious  and  repetitive  proof  of  that  which  one  moment  of  illumination  has  already, 
and  instantly,  demonstrated  to  Being. 

Just  because  the  force  of  our  Faustian  being  has  by  now  worked  up  about  us 
a ckcumcircle  of  inner  experiences  such  as  no  other  men  and  no  other  time  could 
acquire  — just  because  for  us  the  remotest  events  become  increasingly  sig- 
nificant and  disclose  relationships  that  no  one  else,  not  even  the  closest  con- 
temporaries of  these  events,  could  perceive  — much  has  now  become  history 
(i.e.,  life  in  tune  with  our  life)  that  centuries  ago  was  not  history.  Tacitus 
probably  ”knew”  the  data  concerning  Tiberius  Gracchus’s  revolution,  but 
for  him  it  no  longer  meant  anything  effectively,  whereas  for  us  it  is  full  of 
meaning.  The  history  of  the  Monophysites  and  their  relation  to  Mohammed’s 
milieu  signify  nothing  whatever  to  the  Islamic  believer,  but  for  us  it  is  recog- 
ni2:ably  the  story  of  English  Puritanism  in  another  setting.  For  the  world- 
view of  a Civilization  which  has  made  the  whole  earth  its  stage,  nothing  is  in 
the  last  resort  quite  unhistorical.  The  scheme  of  ancient-medi^val-modern 
history,  as  understood  by  the  nineteenth  century,  contained  only  a selection  of 
the  more  obvious  relations.  But  the  influence  that  old  Chinese  and  Mexican 
history  are  beginning  to  exercise  on  us  to-day  is  of  a subtler  and  more  intellectual 
kind.  There  we  are  sounding  the  last  necessities  of  life  itself.  We  are  learning 
out  of  another  life-course  to  know  ourselves  what  we  are,  what  we  must  be, 
what  we  shall  be.  It  is  the  great  school  of  our  future.  We  who  have  history 
still,  are  making  history  still,  find  here  bn  the  extreme  frontiers  of  histor- 
ical humanity  what  history  is, 

^ Zur  Theofie  md  Methodik  dtr  Geschkhte**  (JU^ine  Schriften,  1910),  which  is  by  far  the  best 
piece  of  historical  philosophy  ever  written  by  an  opponent  of  alt  philosophy. 


48':'^  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ■ 

A battle  between  two  Negro  tribes  in  the  Sudan,  or  between  the  Chcrnsci 
and  Chatti  of  Cfesar’s  time,  or' — what  is  substantially  the  same  — between 
ant-cominiinities,  is  merely  a drama  of  ‘Tiving  Nature,*'  But  when  the  Che- 
rnsci  beat  the. 'Romans,  as  in  the  year  9,^  or  the  Aztecs  the  TIascakns,  it  is 
for<?^.,""'Here  the  “when**  is  of  importance  and  each  decade,  or  even  year, 
matters,  for  .here  one  is  dealing  with  the  march  of  a grand  life-course,  in  which 
every  decision  takes  rank  as  an  epoch.  Here  there  is  an  object  towards  which 
every  happening  impels,  a being  that  strives  to  fulfil  its  predestination,  a tempo, 
an  organic  duration  — and  not  the  disorderly  ups  and  downs  of  Scythians, 
Gauls,  or  Caribs,  of  which  the  particular  detail  is  as  unimportant  as  that  of 
doings  in  a colony  of  beavers  or  a steppe-herd  of  gazelles.  These  arc  zp^hgkal 
happenings  and  have  their  place  in  an  altogether  different  orientation  of  our 
outlook,  that  in  which  we  are  concerned  not  with  the  destiny  of  individual 
peoples  or  herds,  but  with  that  of  “man,**  or  “the**  gazelle,  or  “the**  ants,  as 
specks.  Primitive  man  has  history  only  in  the  biological  sense,  and  all  prehistoric 
study  boils  down  to  the  investigation  of  this  sense.  The  increasing  familiarity 
of  men  with  fire,  stone  tools,  and  the  mechanical  laws  which  make  m^eapoos 
effective,  characterizes  only  the  development  of  the  type  and  of  its  latent  possi- 
bilities. The  objects  for  which  one  tribe  employed  these  weapons  against 
another  tribe  are  of  no  importance  in  this  plane  of  history.  Stone  Age  and 
Baroque  arc  age-grades  in  the  existence  of  respectively  a genus  and  a Cul- 
ture— - i.e.,  two  organisms  belonging  to  two  fundamentally  different  settings. 
And  here  I would  protest  against  two  assumptions  that  have  so  far  vitiated 
all  historical  thought:  the  assertion  of  an  ultimate  aim  of  mankind  as  a whole 
and  the  denial  of  there  being  ultimate  aims  at  ail.  The  life  has  an  aim.  It  is  the 
fulfilment  of  that  which  was  ordained  at  its  conception.  But  the  individual 
belongs  by  birth  to  the  particular  high  Culture  on  the  one  hand  and  to  the  type 
Man  on  the  other  — there  is  no  third  unit  of  being  for  him.  His  destiny  must 
lie  either  in  the  zodlogical  or  in  the  world-historical  field.  “Historical**  man, 
as  I understand  the  word  and  as  all  great  historians  have  meant  it  to  be  taken,  is 
the  man  of  a Culture  that  is  in  full  march  towards  self-fulfilment.  Before  this, 
after  this,  outside  this,  man  is  historyless;  and  the  destinies  of  the  people  to 
which  he  belongs  matter  as  little  as  the  Earth's  destiny  matters  when  the  plane 
of  attention  is  the  astronomical  and  not  the  geological. 

From  this  there  follows  a fact  of  the  most  decisive  importance,  and  one  that 
has  never  before  been  established:  that  man  is  not  only  historyless  before  the 
birth  of  the  Culture,  but  again  becomes  so  as  soon  as  a Civilization  has  worked 
itself  out  fully  to  the  definitive  form  which  betokens  the  end  of  the  living 
development  of  the  Culture  and  the  exhaustion  of  the  last  potentialities  of  its 
significant  existence.  That  which  we  see  in  the  Egyptian  Civilization  after 
Seti  I (1300)  and  in  the  Chinese,  the  Indian,  the  Arabian  to  this  day  is — • 
^ Varas’s  disaster  iii  tfic  Teotoburger  Wald.  — Tr. 


THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  4^ 

GOtwithstandmg  all  the  ■ cleverness  of  the  religious,  philosophical  and,  cs-; 
pecially,  political  forms  in  which  it  is  wrapped — just  the  old  2:o5logicaI  up- 
and-down  of  the  primitive  age  again.  Whether  the  lords  sitting  in  Babylon 
were  wild  war-hordes  like  the  Kassites  or  refined  inheritors  like  the  Persians, 
when,  for  how  long,  and  with  what  success  they  kept  their  seats,  signified . 
nothing  from  the  standpoint  of  Babylon.  The  comfort  of  the  population  was 
affected  by  such  things,  naturally,  but  they  made  no  difference  either  way  to 
the  fact  that  the  soul  of  this  world  was  extinct  and  its  events,  therefore,  void 
of  any  deep  meaning.  A new  dynasty,  native  or  foreign,  in  Egypt,  a revolution 
or  a conquest  in  China,  a new  Germanic  people  in  the  Roman  Empire,  were 
elements  in  the  history  of  the  landscape  like  a change  in  the  fauna  or  the  mi- 
gration of  a flock  of  birds. 

In  the  history,  the  genuine  history,  of  higher  men  the  stake  fought  for  and 
the  basis  of  the  animal  struggle  to  prevail  is  ever  — even  when  driver  and 
driven  are  completely  unconscious  of  the  symbolic  force  of  their  doings,  pur- 
poses, and  fortunes  — the  actualization  of  something  that  is  essentially  spirit- 
ual, the  translation  of  an  idea  into  a living  historical  form.  This  applies 
equally  to  the  struggle  of  big  style-tendencies  in  art  (Gothic  and  Renaissance), 
of  philosophy  (Stoics  and  Epicureans),  of  political  ideals  (Oligarchy  and 
Tyrannis),  and  of  economic  forms  (Capitalism  and  Socialism).  But  the  post- 
history is  void  of  all  this.  All  that  remains  is  the  struggle  for  mere  power, 
for  animal  advantage  per  se.  Whereas  previously  power,  even  when  to  all 
appearance  destitute  of  any  inspiration,  was  always  serving  the  Idea  somehow 
or  other,  in  the  late  Civilization  even  the  most  convincing  illusion  of  an  idea 
is  only  the  mask  for  purely  zoological  strivings. 

The  distinction  between  Indian  philosophy  before  and  after  Buddha  is  that 
the  former  is  a grand  movement  towards  attaining  the  aim  of  Indian  thought 
by  and  in  the  Indian  soul,  and  the  latter  the  perpetual  turning-up  of  new  facets 
of  a now  crystallized  and  undevelopable  thought-stock.  The  solutions  are 
there,  for  good,  though  the  fashions  of  expressing  them  change.  The  same  is 
true  of  Chinese  painting  before  and  after  the  Han  dynasties  — whether  we 
know  it  or  not  — and  of  Egyptian  architecture  before  and  after  the  beginning 
of  the  New  Empire.  So  also  with  technics.  The  West's  discoveries  of  the 
steam-engine  and  of  electricity  are  accepted  by  the  Chinese  to-day  in  just  the 
same  way  — and  with  just  the  same  religious  awe  — as  bronze  and  the  plough 
were  accepted  four  thousand  years  ago,  and  fire  in  a still  remoter  age.  Both, 
spiritually,  differ  in  toto  from  the  discoveries  which  the  Chinese  made  for 
themselves  in  the  Chou  period  and  which  in  each  instance  signified  an  epoch  in 
their  inner  history.^  Before  and  after  that  time,  centuries  play  a vastly  less 

^ The  Japanese  belonged  formerly  to  the  Chinese  Civilization  and  again  belong  to  a Civiliza- 
tion — the  Western  — today.  A Japanese  Culture  in  the  gennine  sense  there  has  never  been.  Jap- 
anese Americanism  must,  therefore,  be  judged  otherwise  than  as  an  outgrowth  of  what  never  was 


50  THE  DECLINE  O-F  THE  WEST 

important  :r61e  than  decades  and  even  years  within  the  Culture,  /^r  tk  spans 
time  are  .'gradually . ntuming  to  the  biological  order.  This  it  is  that  confers  upon 
these^  very:  Late  conditions  — which  to  the  people  living  in  them  seem  almost 
self-evident  — that  charactet  of  changeless  pageantry  which  the  genuine 
Culture-man  — e.g.>  Herodotus  in  Egypt  and  the  Western  successors  of  Marco 
Polo  in: China  — has  found  so  astonishing  in  comparison  with  his  own  vigorous 
pulse  of  development.  It  is  the  changelessness  of  non-history. 

,, , , 'Is  not  Classical  history  at  an  end  with  Actiiim  and  the  Pax  Komanal  There 
arc  no  more  of  those  great  decisions  which  concentrate  the  inner  meaning  of  a 
‘whole  Culture.  Unreason,  biology,  is  beginning  to  dominate,  and  it  is  becom- 
ing a matter  of  indifference  for  the  world  — though  not  for  the  actions  of  the 
private  individual  — whether  an  event  turns  out  thus  or  thus.  All  great 
political  questions  arc  solved,  as  they  are  solved  sooner  or  later  in  every  Civili- 
zation, inasmuch  as  questions,  are  no  longer  felt  as  questions  and  are  not  asked. 
Yet  a little  while,  and  man  will  cease  to  understand  what  problems  were  really 
involved',  in  the  earlier  C-atastrophesj  what,  is  not  livingly  experienced  of  one- 
self cannot  be  livingly  experienced  of  another.  When  the  later  Egyptians 
speak  of  the  Hyksos  time,  or  the  later  Chinese  of  the  corresponding  period  of 
the  “Contending  States,*'  they  arc  judging  the  outward  picture  according  to 
the  criteria  of  their  own  ways  of  life,  in  which  there  are  no  riddles  more.  They 
sec  in  these  things  merely  struggles  for  power,  and  they  do  not  sec  that  those 
desperate  wars,  external  and  internal,  wars  in  which  men  stirred  up  the  alien 
against  their  own  kin,  were  fought  for  an  idea.  To-day  we  understand  what 
was  taking  place,  in  fearful  alternations  of  tension  and  discharge,  round  the 
murder  of  Tiberius  Gracchus  and  that  of  Clodius.  In  1700  we  could  not  have 
done  so,  and  in  zaoo  we  shall  again  be  unable  to  do  so.  It  is  just  the  same  with 
that  of  Chian,  a Napoleonic  figure,  in  whom  later  Egyptian  historians  could 
discover  nothing  more  characterized  than  a “Hyksos  king."  Had  it  not  been 
for  the  coming  of  the  Germans,  Roman  historians  a thousand  years  later  might 
have  put  the  Gracchi,  Marius,  Sulla,  and  Cicero  together  as  a dynasty  which 
was  overthrown  by  Cxsar. 

Compare  the  death  of  Tiberius  Gracchus  with  the  death  of  Nero,  when 
Rome  received  the  news  of  Galba’s  rising,  or  the  victory  of  Sulla  over  the 
Marian  party  with  that  of  Septimius  Severus  over  Pescennius  Niger.  If  in  these 
later  cases  the  event  had  gone  otherwise,  would  the  course  of  the  Imperial 
Age  have  been  altered  in  any  way?  The  distinction  so  carefully  drawui  by 
Mommsen  and  Eduard  Meyer  ^ between  the  “principatc"  of  Pompey  and 
Augustus  and  the  “monarchy**  of  Cassar  misses  the  mark  completely.  At  that 
stage,  the  point  is  merely  a constitutional  one,  though  fifty  years  before  it 
would  still  have  signified  an  opposition  between  ideas.  When  Vindex  and 
Galba  in  68  set  out  to  restore  “ the  Republic,*’  they  were  gambling  on  a notion  in 

^ Casars  Mmatchu  und  das  Princfpaf  des  Pompejus  (1918)  pp.  501,  ct  seq. 


■ THE  GROUP  OF  THE  HIGHER  CULTURES  51 

days  when  notions  having  genuine  symbolic  force  had  ceased  to  be,  and  the  only 
question  was  who  should  have  the  plain  material  power.  The  struggle  for  the 
Ca^sar-titlc  became  steadily  more  and  more  negroid,  and  might  have  gone  on 
century  after  century  in  increasingly  primitive  and,  therefore,  “eternal’*  forms. 

These  populations  no  longer  possessed  a soul.  Consequently  they  could 
no  longer  have  a history  proper  to  themselves.  At  best  they  might  acquire 
some  significance  as  an  object  in  the  history  of  an  alien  Culture,  and  whatever 
deeper  meaning  this  relation  possessed  would  be  derived  entirely  from  the  will 
of  the  alien  Life.  Any  effective  historical  happening  that  does  take  place  on 
the  soil  of  an  old  Civilization  acquires  its  consistency  as  a course  of  events  from 
elsewhere  and  never  from  any  part  played  in  it  by  the  man  of  that  soil.  And 
so  once  again  we  find  ourselves  regarding  the  phenomenon  of  “world-history** 
under  the  two  aspects  — life-courses  of  the  great  Cultures  and  relations  be- 
tween them. 


3S84 


CHAPTER  III 


ORIGIN  AND  LANDSCAPE 
CC) 

THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES 


CHAPTER  III 


ORIGIN  AND  LANDSCAPE 

CP) 

THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES 
I 

Although  consideration  of  the  Cultures  themselves  should  logically  pre- 
cede that  of  the  relations  between  them,  modern  historical  thought  generally 
reverses  the  order.  The  less  it  really  knows  of  the  life-courses  which  together 
make  up  a seeming  unity  of  world-happenings,  the  more  zealously  it  searches 
for  life  in  the  web  of  relations,  and  the  less  it  understands  even  of  these.  What 
a wealth  of  psychology  there  is  in  the  probings,  rejections,  choices,  trans- 
valuations, errors,  penetrations,  and  welcomings ! — and  not  only  between 
Cultures  which  immediately  touch  one  another,  wonder  at  one  another,  fight 
one  another,  but  also  as  between  a living  Culture  and  the  form-world  of  a dead 
one  whose  remains  still  stand  visible  in  the  landscape.  And  how  narrow  and 
poor,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the  conceptions  which  the  historians  label  “in- 
fluence,'*'‘continuity,'’ and ‘'permanent  effects”  I 

This  is  pure  nineteenth  century.  What  is  sought  is  just  a chain  of  causes 
and  effects.  Everything  follows  and  nothing  is  prime.  Since  every  young 
Culture  superficially  shows  form-elements  of  older  Cultures,  these  elements 
are  supposed  to  have  had  continuing  effect  Qorfgewkki),  md  when  a set  of  such 
effects  has  been  strung  together,  the  historian  regards  it  with  satisfaction  as 
a sound  piece  of  work. 

At  bottom,  this  mode  of  treatment  rests  upon  that  idea  which  inspired  the 
great  Gothics  long  ago,  the  idea  of  a significant  singleness  in  the  history  of  all 
mankind.  They  saw  how,  on  earth,  men  and  peoples  changed,  but  ideas 
stayed,  and  the  powerful  impressiveness  of  the  picture  has  not  worn  itself  out 
even  to-day.  Originally  it  was  seen  as  a plan  that  God  was  working  out  by 
means  of  the  human  instrument.  ' And  it  could  still  be  regarded  as  such  at  a 
far  later  stage,  in  fact  so  long  as  the  spell  of  the  “ancient-mediasval-modern” 
scheme  lasted  and  its  parade  of  permanence  prevented  us  from  noting  that 
actuality  was  ever  changing.  But  meantime  our  outlook  also  has  altered 
and  become  cooler  and  wider.  Our  knowledge  has  long  overpassed  the  limits 
of  this  chart,  and  those  who  are  still  trying  to  sail  by  it  are  beating  about  in 
vain.  It  is  not  products  that  “ influence,”  but  creators  that  absorb.  Being 
has  been  confused  with  waking-being,  life  with  the  means  by  which  it  expresses 
itself.  The  critical  thought,  or  even  simple  waking-consciousness,  sees  every- 

55 


56  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

where  theoretical  units  subjected  to  motion.  That  is  truly  dynamic  and  Faus- 
tian, for  in  no  other  Culture  have  men  imagined  history  thus.  The  Greek,  with 
his.  thoroughly  corporeal  understanding  of  the  world,  would  never  have  traced 
‘‘effects”  of  pure  expression-units  like  “Attic  drama”  or  “Egyptian  art.” 

■ Originally  what  happens  is  that  a name  is  g.ivcn  to  a systmi  of  expression- 
forms  conjuring  up  in  our  minds  a particular  complex  of  relations.  But  this 
does  not  last  long,  and  soon  one  is  suppositing  under  the  name  a being,  and  un- 
der the  relation  an  effect.  When  we  speak  to-day  of  Greek  philosophy,  or 
Buddhism,  or  Scholasticism,  we  mean  something  that  is  somehow  living,  a « 
power-unit  that  has  grown  and  grown  until  it  is  mighty  enough  to  take 
possession  of  men,  to  subject  their  waking-consciousness  and  even  their  being, 
and  in  the  end  to  force  them  into  an  active  conformity,  which  prolongs  the 
direction  followed  by  its  own  “life.”  It  is  a whole  mythology,  and,  signifi- 
cantly, it  is  only  men  of  the  Western  Culture  — the  only  mankind  that  lives 
with  and  in  this  picture  is  the  Western  — whose  myth  contains  plenty  of 
daemons  of  this  sort  — “ electricity  ‘ * and  ” positional  energy, ' * for  example. 

In  reality  these  systems  only  exist  in  the  human  waking-consciousness,  and 
they  exist  as  modes  of  activity.  Religion,  science,  art,  are  acmitks  of  waking- 
consciousness  that  are  based  on  a being.  Faith,  meditation,  creation,  and  what- 
ever of  visible  activity  is  required  as  outcome  of  these  invisibles  — as  sacri- 
fice, prayer,  the  physical  experiment,  the  carving  of  a statue,  the  statement  of 
an  experience  in  communicable  words  ^ — are  activities  of  the  waking-con- 
sciousness and  nothing  else.  Other  men  see  only  the  visible  and  hear  only 
words.  In  so  doing  they  experience  something  in  themselves,  but  they  can- 
not give  any  account  of  the  relation  between  this  experience  and  that  which 
the  creator  lived  in  himself.  We  see  a form,  but  we  do  not  know  what  in  the 
other’s  soul  begat  that  form;  we  can  only  have  some  belief  about  the  matter, 
and  we  believe  by  putting  in  our  own  soul.  However  definitely  and  distinctly 
a religion  may  express  itself  in  words,  they  arc  words,  and  the  hearer  puts  his 
own  sense  into  them.  However  impressive  the  artist’s  notes  or  colours,  the 
beholder  sees  and  hears  in  them  only  himself,  and  if  he  cannot  do  so,  the  work 
is  for  him  meaningless.  (The  extremely  rare  and  highly  modern  gift,  possessed  ^ 
by  a few  intensely  historical  men,  of  “putting  oneself  in  the  other’s  place” 
need  not  be  considered  in  this  connexion.)  The  German  whom  Boniface  con- 
verted did  not  transfer  himself  into  the  missionary’s  souL,  It  was  a spring- 
tide  quiver  that  passed  in  those  days  through  the  whole  young  world  of  the 
North,  and  what  it  meant  was  that  each  man  found  suddenly  in  conversion 
a language  wherein  to  express  his  own- religiousness.  Just  so  the  eyes  of  a 
child  light  up  when  we  tell  it  the  name  of  the  object  in  its  hand. 

It  is  not,  then,  microcosmic  units  that  move,  but  cosmic  entities  that  pick 
amongst  them  and  appropriate  them.  Were  it  otherwise  — were  these  systems 
very  beings  that  could  exercise  an  activity  (for  “influence”  is  an  organic 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES'  57' 

$,cmitj)  — the,  picture  of  history  would  be  quite  other  thaa  what  it  is.  • Coii-^ 
sider  how  every  maturing  man  and  every  living  Culture  is  continuously  bathed 
in  iiiGumerabic  potential  influences.  Out  of  all  these,  only  some  few  are  ^i- 
as  such  — the  great  majority  are  not.  Is  choice  concerned  with  the 

works,  or.  with  the  men? 

The  historian  who  is  intent  upon  establishing  causal  series  counts  only  the 
influences  that  are  present,  and  the  other  side  of  the  reckoning  — those  that 
are  not^^^ — does  not  appear.  With  the  psychology  of  the  ‘‘positive*'  influences 
is  associated  that  of  the  “negative."  This  is  a domain  into  which  no  one  has 
yet  ventured,  but  here,  if  anywhere,  there  are  fruits  to  be  reaped,  and  it  must 
be  tackled  unless  the  answer  to  the  whole  question  is  to  be  left  indeterminate; 
for  if  we  try  to  evade  it,  we  are  driven  into  illusory  visions  of  world-historical 
happening  as  a continuous  process  in  which  everything  is  properly  accounted 
for.  Two  Cultures  may  touch  between  man  and  man,  or  the  man  of  one  Culture 
may  be  confronted  by  the  dead  form-world  of  another  as  presented  in  its  com- 
municable relics.  In  both  cases  the  agent  is  the  man  himself.  The  closed-off 
act  of  A can  be  vivified  by  B only  out  of  his  own  being,  and  eo  ipso  it  becomes 
B's,  his  inward  property,  his  work,  and  part  of  himself.  There  was  no  move- 
ment of  “Buddhism"  from  India  to  China,  but  an  acceptance  of  part  of  the 
Indian  Buddhists’  store  of  images  by  Chinese  of  a certain  spiritual  tendency, 
who  fashioned  out  a mw  mode  of  religious  expression  having  meaning  for 
Chinese,  and  only  Chinese,  Buddhists.  What  matters  in  all  such  cases  is  not  the 
original  meanings  of  thefforms,  but  the  forms  themselves,  as  disclosing  to  the 
active  sensibility  and  understanding  of  the  observer  potential  modes  of  his  own 
creativeness.  Connotations  are  not  transferable.  Men  of  two  different  kinds 
are  parted,  each  in  his  own  spiritual  loneliness,  by  an  impassable  gulf.  Even 
though  Indians  and  Chinese  in  those  days  both  felt  as  Buddhists,  they  were 
spiritually  as  far  apart  as  ever.  The  same  words,  the  same  rites,  the  same 
symbol  — but  two  different  souls,  each  going  its  own  way. 

Searching  through  all  Cultures,  then,  one  will  always  find  that  the  con- 
tinuation of  earlier  creations  into  a later  Culture  is  only  apparent,  and  that  in 
fact  the  younger  being  has  set  up  a few  (very  few)  relations  to  the  older  beings 
always  without  regard  to  the  original  meanings  of  that  which  it  makes  its  own. 
What  becomes,  then,  of  the  “permanent  conquests"  of  philosophy  and  science? 
We  are  told  again  and  again  how  much  of  Greek  philosophy  still  lives  on  to-day, 
but  this  is  only  a figure  of  speech  without  real  content,  for  first  Magian  and  then 
Faustian  humanity,  each  with  the  deep  wisdom  of  its  unimpaired  instincts, 
rejected  that  philosophy,  or  passed  unregarding  by  it,  or  retained  its  formulae 
under  radically  new  interpretations.  The  naive  credulity  of  erudite  enthusiasm 
deceives  itself  here  — Greek  philosophic  notions  would  make  a long  catalogue, 
and  the  further  it  is  taken,  the^more  vanishingly  small  becomes  the  proportion 
of  the  alleged  survivals.  Our  custom  is  simply  to  overlook  as  incidental 


5g:  : DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST:  ■ : / , 

''ertofs’*  sucH  conceptioas  as  Democfims’s  theory  of  atomic  images,^  the  very 
corporeal  world  of  Plato’s  ideas/*  and  the  fifty-two  hollow  spheres  of  Aris- 
totle’s universe,  as  though  we  could  presume  to  know  what  the  dead  meant 
better  than  they  knew  themselves!  These  things  are  truths  and  essential  — 
only,  not  for  us.  The  sum  total  of  the  Greek  philosophy  that  we  possess, 
actually  and  not  merely  superficially,  is  practically  nil.  Let  us  be  honest 
and  take  the  old  philosophers  at  their  word;  not  one  proposition  of  Heraclitus 
or  Democritus  or  Plato  is  true  for  us  unless  and  until  we  have  accommodated 
it  to  ourselves.  And  how  much,  after  all,  have  we  taken  over  of  the  methods, 
the  concepts,  the  intentions,  and  the  means  of  Greek  science,  let  alone  its 
basically  incomprehensible  terms?  The  Renaissance,  men  say,  was  completely 
under  the  “influence”  of  Classical  art.  But  what  about  the  form  of  the  Doric 
temple,  the  Ionic  column,  the  relation  of  column  to  architrave,  the  choice  of 
colour,  the  treatment  of  background  and  perspective  in  painting,  the  principles 
of  figure-grouping/ vase-painting,  mosaic,  encaustic,  the  structural  element  in 
statuary,  the  proportions  of  Lysippus?  Why  did  all  this  exercise  no  ‘‘in- 
fluence?” 

Became  that  which  one  (here,  the  Renaissance  artist)  wills  to  express  is  in  him 
a priori.  Of  the  stock  of  dead  forms  that  he  had  in  front  of  him,  he  really  saw 
only  the  few  that  he  wanted  to  see,  and  saw  them  as  he  wanted  them  — namely, 
in  line  with  his  own  intention  and  not  with  the  intention  of  the  original 
creator,  for  no  living  art  ever  seriously  considers  that.  Try  to  follow,  element 
by  element,  the  “ influence”  of  Egyptian  plastic  upon  early  Greek,  and  you  will 
find  in  the  end  that  there  is  none  at  all,  but  that  the  Greek  will-to-form  took 
out  of  the  older  art-stock  some  few  characteristics  that  it  would  in  any  case  have 
discovered  in  some  shape  for  itself.  All  round  the  Classical  landscape  there 
were  working,  or  had  worked,  Egyptians,  Cretans,  Babylonians,  Assyrians, 
Hittites,  Persians,  and  Phoenicians,  and  the  works  of  these  peoples  — their 
buildings,  ornaments,  art-works,  cults,  state-forms,  scripts,  and  sciences  — 
were  known  to  the  Greeks  in  profusion.  But  how  much  out  of  all  this  mass  did 
the  Classical  soul  extract  as  its  own  means  of  expression?  I repeat,  it  is  only  the 
relations  that  are  accepted  th^x  we  observe.  But  what  of  those  that  were  not  ac- 
cepted? Why,  for  example,  do  we  fail  to  find  in  the  former  category  the  pyra- 
mid, pylon,  and  obelisk  of  Egypt,  or  hieroglyphic,  or  cuneiform?  What  of  the 
stock  of  By2:antium  and  of  the  Moorish  East  was  not  accepted  by  Gothic  art  and 
thought  in  Spain  and  Sicily?  It  is  impossible  to  overpraise  the  wisdom  (quite 
unconscious)  that  governed  the  choice  and  the  unhesitating  transvaluation  of 
what  was  chosen.  Every  relation  that  was  accepted  was  not  only  an  exception, 
but  also  a misunderstanding,  and  the  inner  force  of  a Being  is  never  so  clearly 
evidenced  as  it  is  in  this  art  of  deliberate  misunderstanding.  The  more  enthusias- 
tically we  laud  the  principles  of  an  alien  thought,  the  more  fundamentally  in 

^ I.e.,  that  sensation  consists  in  the  absorption  of  small  particles  radiated  by  the  object.  — Tr. 


■ THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES-  59, 

truth  we  have  denatured  it.  Onl}r  consider  the  praises  addressed  by  the  West 
to  Plato  1 From  Bernard  of  Chartres  and  Marsilius  Ficinus  to  Goethe  and 
Schelling  ! And  the  more  humble  our  acceptance  of  an  alien  religion,  the  more 
certain  it  is  that  that  religion  has  already  assumed  the  form  of  the  new  soul. 
Truly,  someone  ought  to  have  written  the  history  of  the  “three  Aristotles’l 
— Greek,  Arabian,  and  Gothic  — who  had  not  one  concept  or  thought  in 
common.  Or  the  history  of  the  transformation  of  Magian  Christianity  into 
Faustian!  We  are  told  in  sermon  and  book  that  this  religion  extended  from  the 
old  Church  into  and  over  the  Western  field  without  change  of  essence.  Actu- 
ally, Magian  man  evolved  out  of  the  deepest  depths  of  his  dualistic  world- 
consciousness  a language  of  his  own  religious  awareness  that  we  call  “the' b 
Christian  religion.  So  much  of  this  experience  as  was  communicable  — words, 
formulas,  rites  — was  accepted  by  the  man  of  the  Late>Classicai  Civilization 
as  a means  of  expression  for  his  religious  need;  then  it  passed  from  man  to 
man,  even  to  the  Germans  of  the  Western  pre-Culture,  in  words  always  the  same 
and  in  sense  always  altering.  Men  would  never  have  dared  to  impove  upon  the 
original  meanings  of  the  holy  words  — it  was  simply  that  they  did  not  know 
these  meanings.  If  this  be  doubted,  let  the  doubter  study  “ the"  idea  of  Grace, 
as  it  appears  under  the  dualistic  interpretation  of  Augustine  affecting  a sub- 
stance in  man,  and  under  the  dynamic  interpretaion  of  Calvin,  affecting  a 
will  in  man.  Or  that  Magian  idea,  which  we  can  hardly  grasp  at  all,  of  the 
consensus  (Arabic  ijma)  ^ wherein,  as  a consequence  of  the  presence  in  each  man 
of  2L  pneuma  emanating  from  the  divine  pneuma^  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the 
elect  is  held  to  be  immediate  divine  Truth.  It  was  this  that  gave  the  decisions 
of  the  early  Church  Councils  their  authoritative  character,  and  it  underlies 
the  scientific  methods  that  rule  in  the  world  of  Islam  to  this  day.  And  it  was 
because  Western  men  did  not  understand  this  that  the  Church  Councils  of  later 
Gothic  times  amounted,  for  him,  to  nothing  more  than  a kind  of  parliament  for 
limiting  the  spiritual  mobility  of  the  Papacy.  This  idea  of  what  a Council 
meant  prevailed  even  in  the  fifteenth  century  — think  of  Constance  and  Basel, 
Savonarola  and  Luther  — and  in  the  end  it  disappeared,  as  futile  and  meaning- 
less, before  the  conception  of  Papal  Infallibility.  Or,  again,  the  idea,  universal 
in  the  Early  Arabian  world,  of  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh,  which  again  pre- 
supposed that  of  divine  and  human  pneuma.  Classical  man  assumed  that  the 
soul,  as  the  form  and  meaning  of  the  body,  was  somehow  co-created  herewith, 
and  Greek  thought  scarcely  mentions  it.  Silence  on  a matter  of  such  gravity 
may  be  due  to  one  or  the  other  of  two  reasons  — the  idea’s  not  being  there 
at  all,  or  being  so  self-evident  as  not  to  emerge  into  consciousness  as  a problem. 
With  Arabian  man  it  was  the  latter.  But  just  as  self-evident  for  him  was  the 
notion  that  his  pneuma  was  an  emanation  from  God  that  had  taken  up  residence 
in  his  body.  Necessarily,  therefore,  there  had  to  be  something  from  which  the 

1 See  Ch.  Vm  feelow,  — Tf. 


:6o;  THE  DECLINE  OF'  THE  WEST  ^ ' 

human  soul  should  rise  again  on  the  Day  of  Judgment,  and  hence  resurrection 
was  thought  of  as  k veKp&Pj  “out  of  the  corpses/*  This,  in  its  deeper  mean- 
ing, is  utterly  incomprehensible  for  the  West.  The  words  of  Holy  Scripture 
were  not  indeed  doubted,  but  unconsciously  another  meaning  was  substituted 
by  the  finer  minds  amongst  Catholics,  this  other  meaning,  unmistakable  already 
in  Luther  and  to-day  quite  general,  is  the  conception  of  immortality  as  the 
continued  existence  to  all  eternity  of  the  soul  as  a centre  of  force.  Were 
Paul  or  Augustine  to  become  acquainted  with  our  ideas  of  Christianity,  they 
would  reject  all  our  dogmas,  all  our  books,  and  all  our  concepts  as  utterly 
erroneous  and  heretical. 

As  the  strongest  example  of  a system  that  to  all  appearance  has  travelled 
unaltered  through  two  millennia,  and  yet  actually  has  passed  through 
three  whole  courses  of  evolution  in  three  Cultures,  with  completely  different 
meanings  in  each,  we  may  take  Roman  law, 

n 

Law,  in  the  Classical  world,  is  law  made  by  citizens  for  citizens  and  presupposes 
that  the  state-form  is  that  of  the  Polis.  It  was  this  basic  form  of  public  life 
that  led  — and  self-evidently  — to  the  notion  of  the  person  as  identical  with 
the  man  who,  added  to  others  like  him,  made  up  the  body  (o-%a)  ^ of  the 
State.  From  this  formal  fact  of  Classical  world-feeling  grew  up  the  whole 
structure  of  Classical  law. 

Rersona^*  then  is  a specifically  Classical  notion^  possessing  meaning  and  valency 
only  in  the  Classic^  Culture,  The  individual  person  is  a body  which  belongs  to 
the  stock  of  the  Polis.  It  is  with  reference  to  him  that  the  law  of  the  Polis 
is  ordered,  downwards  into  the  law  of  Things  — with,  as  a marginal  case,  the 
slave  who  was  body,  but  not  person  — and  upward  into  the  law  of  Gods  — 
with,  as  a marginal  case,  the  hero  who  from  being  person  had  attained  god- 
head and  the  legal  right  to  a cult,  like  Lysander  and  Alexander  in  the  Greek 
cities  and  Divus  Julius  and  his  successors  in  Rome.  This  tendency,  becoming 
more  and  more  definite  in  the  development  of  Classical  jurisprudence,  explains 
also  the  notion  of  capitis  deminutio  media,  which,  is  so  alien  to  our  Western  ideas; 
for  we  can  imagine  a person  (in  our  sense  of  the  word)  as  deprived  of  certain 
rights  and  even  of  all  rights,  but  the  Classical  man  under  this  punishment 
ceased  to  be  a person  although  living  on  as  a body.  And  the  specifically  Classical 
idea  of  the  thing,  res,  is  only  intelligible  in  contrast  to  and  as  the  object  of 
persona. 

As  Classical  religion  was  State  religion  through  and  through,  there  is  no 
distinction  made  as  to  the  fount  of  law;  real  law  and  divine  law  were  made, 
like  personal  law,  by  the  citizen,  and  the  relations  of  things  and  of  gods  to 
persons  were  precise  and,  definite.  Now,  it  was  a fact  of  decisive  significance 
^ See  R.  Hirzcl,  Die  Rerson  (xs^4)»  P*  7* 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  : '61 

for  the  Classical  iurisprudeiice  that  it  was  always  the  product  of  immediate 
public  experience — and,  moreover,  not  the  professional  experience  of  the 
jurists,  but  the  practical  everyday  experience  of  men  who  counted  in  political 
and  economic  life  generally.  The  man  who  followed  the  public  career  in  Rome 
had  necessarily  to  be  jurist,  general,  administrator,  and  financial  manager. 
When  he  gave  judgment  as  prastor,  he  had  behind  him  a wide  experience  of 
many  fields  other  than  law.  A judicial  class ^ professionally  (let  alone  theo- 
retically) specialised  in  law  as  its  sole  activity,  was  entirely  unknown  to  the 
Classical.  The  whole  outlook  of  the  later  jurisprudence  was  determined  by 
this  fact.  The  Romans  were  here  neither  systematists  nor  historians  nor 
theorists,  but  just  splendidly  practical.  Their  jurisprudence  is  zn  empirical 
science  of  indwidml  cases ^ a refined  technique,  and  not  in  the  least  a structure  of 
abstractions.^ 

It  would  give  an  incorrect  idea  to  oppose  Greek  and  Roman  law  to  one 
another  as  quantities  of  the  same  order.  Roman  law  in  its  whole  development 
is  an  individual  city  law,  one  amongst  hundreds  of  such,  and  Greek  law  as  a unity 
never  existed  at  all.  Although  Greek-speaking  cities  very  often  had  similar 
laws,  this  did  not  alter  the  fact  that  the  law  of  each  was  its  own  and  no  other's. 
Never  did  the  idea  of  a general  Doric,  still  less  a general  Hellenic,  legislation 
arise.  Such  notions  were  wholly  alien  to  Classical  thought.  The  jus  civile 
applied  only  to  Quirites  — foreigners,  slaves  and  the  whole  world  outside  the 
city  - simply  did  not  count  in  the  eyes  of  the  law,  whereas  even  the  Sachsen- 
Spiegel  ^ evidences  already  our  own  deep-felt  idea  that  there  can  only  really  be  one 
law.  Until  far  into  Imperial  times  the  strict  distinction  was  maintained  be** 
tween  the  jus  civile  of  citizens  and  the  jus  gentium  for  “ other  people*’  who  came 
within  the  cognizance  of  Rome’s  jurisdiction  as  sojourners.'^  (It  need  hardly 
be  added  that  this  “ law  of  nations”  has  no  sort  of  resemblance  to  that  which  we 
call  by  the  same  name.)  It  was  only  because  Rome  as  a unit-city  attained  — 
as  under  other  conditions  Alexandria  might  have  attained  — to  “Imperium” 
over  the  Classical  world  that  Roman  law  became  pre-eminent,  not  because  of  its 
intrinsic  superiority,  but  firstly  through  Rome’s  political  success  and  afterwards 
because  of  Rome’s  monopoly  of  practical  experience  on  the  large  scale.  The 
formation  of  a general  Classical  jurisprudence  of  Hellenistic  cast  — if  we  are 
entitled  to  call  by  that  name  an  aiSinity  of  spirit  in  a large  number  of  separate 
legal  systems  — falls  in  a period  when  Rome  was  still  politically  a third-rate 
power.  And  when  Roman  law  began  to  assume  bigger  forms,  this  was  only  one 

^ L.  Wenger,  Das  Kecht  der  Grkchen  und  Komer  (1914),  p.  170;  R.v,  Mayr,  Kmische  ’R.echtsgeschkhte^ 
R,  I,  p.  87. 

® A curious  sidelight  on  this  appears  in  the  provisions  of  the  savage  law  against  recalcitrant 
debtors,  who  (after  certain  delays  and  formalities)  could  be  put  to  death  and  even  hewn  in  pieces 
by  their  creditors,  or  — “sold  as  slaves  beyond  the  Tiber.*'  — Tr. 

® A thirteenth-century  collection  by  Eikc  von  Rcpgow  of  German  customs  and  customary 
law  (cd.  K.  G.  Homeycr,ri86i).  — Tr. 

^ And  were  judged  by  a different  authority,  the  peregrin  prxtor.  — Tr. 


Sx 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ■ 

aspect  of  the  fact  that  Roinan  intellect  had  subjugated  Hellenism.  The  work  of 
forming  later  Classical  law  passed  from  Hellenism  to  Rome  — i.e.,  from  a sum 
of  city-stateS;»  which  one  and  all  had  been  impiressively  made  aware  of  their  in- 
dividual impotence,  to  one  single  city  whose  whole  activity  was  in  the  end 
devoted  to  the  upholding  and  exploitation  of  an  effective  primacy.  Thus  it 
came  about  that  Hellenism  never  formed  a jurisprudence  in  the  Greek  tongue. 
When  the  Classical  world  entered  upon  a stage  in  which  it  was  ripe  for  this 
science  (the  latest  of  all),  there  was  but  one  lawgiving  city  that  counted  in  the 
matter. 

M reality,  insufficient  regard  has  been  paid  to  the  fact  that  Greek  and 
Roman  law  are  not  parallel  in  time  but  successive.  Roman  law  is  the  younger 
and  presupposes  the  long  experience  of  the  elder;  ^ it  was  built  up,  in  fact, 
late  and,  with  this  exemplar  before  it,  very  swiftly.  It  is  not  without  signifi- 
cance that  the  flowering-time  of  the  Stoic  philosophy,  which  deeply  affected 
juridical  ideas,  followed  that  of  Greek,  but  preceded  that  of  Roman,  law. 

in 

This  jurisprudence,  however,  was  built  up  by  the  mind  of  an  intensely 
ahistorical  species  of  man.  Classical  law,  consequently,  is  law  of  the  day 
and  even  the  moment;  it  was  in  its  very  idea  occasional  legislation  for  particular 
cases,  and  when  the  case  was  settled,  it  ceased  to  be  law.  To  extend  its  validity 
over  subsequent  cases  would  have  been  in  contradiction  to  the  Classical  sense 
of  the  present. 

The  Roman  prastor,  at  the  beginning  of  his  year  of  office,  issued  an  edict  in 
which  he  set  forth  the  rules  that  he  intended  to  follow,  but  his  successor  next 
year  was  in  nowise  bound  to  them.  And  even  this  limitation  of  a year  on  the 
validity  of  the  rules  did  not  mean  that  this  was  actually  the  duration  of  the 
rules.  On  the  contrary  (particularly  after  the  Lex  ^butia')  the  prastor  formu- 
lated in  each  individual  case  the  concrete  rule  of  law  for  the  judges  ^ to  whom 
he  remitted  the  matter  for  judgment,  which  had  to  be  according  to  this  rule 
and  no  other.  That  is,  the  praetor  produced,  and  indeed  generated,  a present 
law  without  duration.^ 

Similar  in  appearance,  but  so  profoundly  different  in  meaning  as  to  leave  no 
doubt  as  to  the  great  gap  which  is  set  between  Classical  and  Western  Law,  is 
that  inspired  and  truly  Germanic  notion  of  English  jurisprudence,  the  creative 
power  of  the  judge  who  “declares”  the  law.  His  business  is  to  apply  a law 

^ The  “dependence”  of  Classical  law  upon  Egyptian  is,  as  it  chances,  still  traceable.  Solon 
the  wholesale  merchant  introduced  into  his  Attic  legislation  provisions  concerning  debt-slavery, 
contract,  work-shyness,  and  unemployment  taken  from  Egypt.  Diodorus,  I,  77,  79,  94. 

^ The  process  is  clearly  explained  in  Goudy's  article  “Roman  Law,”  En(^.  Brit.,  XI  ed. 
Very  roughly,  the  praetor  corresponded  to  the  judge,  and  the  judges  to  the  jury,  of  modern  English 
law,  but  such  a parallel  must  not  be  pressed  far.  ^ Tf. 

® L.  Waigct,  Kecht  der  Gruchen  und  Rdmer,  pp.  1S6,  ct  scq. 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  '6v 

whicL  in  principle  possesses  eternal  validity.  Even  the  application  of  the 
existing  body  of  laws  he  can  regulate,  according  to  the  situations  disclosed  in 
the  course  of  the  case,  by  means  of  his  “rules”  (which  have  nothing  in  common 
with  the  praetor’s).  And  if  he  should  conclude  in  the  presence  of  a particular 
set  of  facts  that  current  law  is  defective  in  respect  of  these,  he  can  fill  the  gap 
at  ome^^  and  thus  in  the  very  middle  of  a trial  create  new  law,  which  (if  con- 
curred in  by  the  judicial  body  in  the  due  forms)  becomes  thereafter  part  and  parcel 
of  the  permanent  stock  of  law.  This  is  what  makes  it  so  completely  un-ClassicaL 
In  the  old  jurisprudence,  the  gradual  formation  of  a stock  of  rules  was  due  purely 
to  the  fact  that  public  life  followed  a substantially  homogeneous  course 
thoughout  a particular  period,  and  produced  again  and  again  the  same  situations 
to  be  dealt  with  — rules  not  deliberately  invested  with  validity  for  the  future, 
but  more  or  less  recreated  again  and  again  as  empirical  rulings  ad  hoc.  The 
sum  of  these  rulings  — not  a system,  but  a collection  — came  to  constitute 
“ the  law  ’ ’ as  we  find  it  in  the  later  legislation  by  praetor's  edict,  each  successive 
praetor  having  found  it  practically  convenient  to  take  over  substantial  portions 
of  his  predecessor's  work. 

Experience,  then,  means  for  the  ancient  lawgiver  something  different  from 
what  it  means  to  us.  It  means,  not  the  comprehensive  outlook  over  a consistent 
mass  of  law  that  contains  implicitly  every  possible  case,  associated  with  prac- 
tical skill  in  applying  it,  but  the  experimental  knowledge  that  certain  jural 
situations  are  for  ever  recurring,  so  that  one  can  save  oneself  the  trouble  of 
forming  new  law  on  every  occasion. 

The  genuine  Classical  form  for  the  slow  accretion  of  legal  material  is  an 
almost  automatic  summation  of  individual  vojioi  leges,  edicta,  as  we  find  it  in 
the  heyday  of  the  Roman  prxtor.  All  the  so-called  legislations  of  Solon, 
Charondas,  and  the  Twelve  Tables  arc  nothing  but  occasional  collections  of 
such  edicts  as  had  been*  found  to  be  useful.  The  Law  of  Gortyn,^  which  is  more 
or  less  contemporary  with  the  Twelve,  is  a supplement  to  some  older  collection. 
A newly-founded  city  would  promptly  provide  itself  with  such  a collection, 
and  in  the  process  a certain  amount  of  dilettantism  would  slip  in  (cf.  the  law- 
makers satirized  by  Aristophanes  in  The  Birds').  But  there  is  never  system  in 
them,  still  less  any  intention  of  establishing  enduring  law  thereby. 

In  the  West  it  is  conspicuously  the  other  way  about.  The  tendency  is  from 
the  first  to  bring  the  entire  living  body  of  law  into  a general  code,  ordered 
for  ever  and  exhaustively  complete,  containing  in  advance  the  decision  of 
every  conceivable  future  problem.^  All  Western  law  bears  the  stamp  of  the 
future,  all  Classical  the  stamp  of  the  moment. 

^ See  Ency.  Brt.,XL  ed.,  Vol.  XII,  p.  5o^.  Fragments  of  the  older  collection  referred  to  were  found 
in  the  vicinity.  — Tr. 

2 In  English  legal  theory  the  judge  does  not  make  law  by  a new  decision,  but  ‘ ‘ declares**  the  law 
i.e,,  makes  explicit  what  has  been  implicit  in  the  law  from  the  first,  though  the  occasion  for  its 
manifestation  has  not  hitherto  arisen.  — Tr. 


64 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 


IV 

Bnt  this,  it  may  be  said,  is  contradicted  by  the  fact  that  there  acmally  were 
Classical  law-works  compiled  by  professional  jurists  for  permanent  use.  Un- 
doubtedly so.  But  we  must  remember  that  we  are  completely  ignorant  of 
Early  Classical  law  (iioo-yoo)  and  it  is  pretty  certain  that  the  customary  law 
of  the  country-side  and  the  nascent  town  was  never  noted  down  as  that  of  the 
Gothic  age  was  set  forth  in  the  Sachsenspkgel  or  that  of  the  Early  Arabian  in 
the  Syrian  Law-book^  The  earliest  stratification  that  we  can  now  detect  con- 
sists of  the  collections  (from  700  b.c.)  ascribed  to  mythical  or  semi-mythical 
personages  like  Lycurgus,  Zaleucus,  Charondas,  and  Dracon,^  and  certain 
Roman  kings. ^ That  these  existed  the  form  of  the  saga  shows,  but  of  their 
real  authors,  the  actual  process  of  their  codification,  and  their  original  contents 
even  the  Greeks  of  the  Persian  War  period  were  ignorant. 

A second  stratification,  corresponding  to  Justinian’s  code  and  to  the  Re- 
ception” of  Roman  Law  in  Germany,  is  connected  with  the  names  of  Solon 
(600),  Pittacus  (550),  and  others.  Here  the  laws  have  already  attained  to  a 
structure  and  are  inspired  by  the  city;  they  are  described  as  ‘‘politeiai,” 
**  nomoi,”  in  contrast  to  old  “thesmai”  and  “rhetrai.”^  In  reality,  therefore, 
we  only  know  the  history  of  late  Classical  law.  Now,  why  these  sudden  codi- 
fications? A mere  look  at  these  names  shows  that  at  bottom  they  were  not 
processes  of  putting  down  the  results  of  pure  experience,  but  decisions  of  political 
power  problems. 

It  is  a grave  error  to  suppose  that  a law  that  surveys  all  things  evenly  and 
without  being  influenced  by  political  and  economic  interests  can  exist  at  all. 

. Such  a state  of  things  can  be  pictured,  and  is  always  being  pictured,  by  those 
who  suppose  that  the  imagining  of  political  possibilities  is  a political  activity. 
But  nothing  alters  the  fact  that  such  a law,  born  of  abstractions,  does  not 
exist  in  real  history.  Always  the  law  contains  in  abstract  form  the  world- 
picture  of  its  author,  and  every  historical  world-picture  contains  a political- 
economic  tendency  dependent,  not  upon  what  this  man  or  that  thinks,  but  upon 
what  is  practically  intended  by  the  class  which  in  fact  commands  the  power 
and,  with  it,  the  legislation.  Every  law  is  established  by  a class  in  the  name  of 
the  generality.  Anatole  France  once  said  that  “our  law  in  majestic  equality 
forbids  the  rich  no  less  than  the  poor  to  steal  bread  and  to  beg  in  the  street.”  ^ 

1 See  Ency.  Brit,,  XI  ed.,  Voi  XXVI,  p.  315.  Tr, 

* See  Beloch,  Gruchischt  GeschichtCy  I,  i,  p.  350. 

* The  background  of  this  is  Etruscan  law,  the  primitive  form  of  the  Roman,  Rome  was  an 
Etruscan  city- 

^ Bx&oXt,  Grkchische  Staatskunde,  ytZ. 

® Compare  the  famous  ironical  judgment  of  Mr.  Justice  Maule  which  led  to  the  reform  of  the 
divorce  laws  in  England  (1857):  “ . . . It  is  true  that  the  course  which  you  should  legally  have 
taken]  would  have  cost  you  many  hundreds  of  pounds,  whereas  probably  you  have  not  as  many 
pence,  the  Law  knms  no  distinction  between  rich  and  par.**  ^ Tr. 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  65 

A onc-sidcd  justice  lao  doubt.  But  equally  the  other  side  will  always  . try  , to  ' 
wiu  sole  authority  for  laws  derived  from  its  outlook  upon  life.  These  legis- 
ktivc  codes  are  one  and  all  political  acts,  and  party-political  acts  at  that in 
the  case  of  Solon  a democratic  constitution  (iroXtreta)  combined  with  private 
laws  (w^oE)  of  the  same  stamp,  in  that  of  Dracon  and  the  Decemvirs  ^ an  oli- 
garchic constitution  fortified  by  private  law.  It  was  left  to  Western  historians, 
aecustomed  to  their  own  durable  law,  to  undervalue  the  importance  of  this 
connexion;  Classical  man  was  under  no  misapprehension  as  to  what  really 
happened  in  these  cases.  The  product  of  the  Decemvirs  was  in  Rome  the  last 
code  of  purely  patrician  character.  Tacitus  calls  it  the  end  of  right  law  Q' finis 
aqui  juris,  * * Annals,  III,  zj).  For,  just  as  the  fall  of  the  Decemvirs  was  followed 
very  significantly  by  the  rise  of  another  Ten,  the  Tribunes,  so  immediately  the 
jus  of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  the  constitution  on  which  it  was  founded  began 
to  be  attacked  by  the  undermining  process  of  the  lex  rogasa  (people’s  law), 
which  set  itself  with  Roman  constancy  to  do  what  Solon  had  achieved  in  one 
act  in  the  case  of  Dracon’s  work,  the  irarpios  iroktreia  which  was  the  law-ideal 
of  the  Attic  oligarchy.  Thenceforward  Dracon  and  Solon  were  the  “slogans’* 
in  the  long  battle  between  Oligarchy  and  Demos,  which  in  Rome  meant  Senate 
and  Tribunate.  The  Spartan  constitution  associated  with  the  name  “ Lycurgus” 
not  only  stood  for  the  ideal  of  Dracon  and  the  Twelve  Tables,  but  concreted 
it.  We  can  see,  parallel  with  the  closely  related  course  of  events  in  Rome,  the 
tendency  of  the  two  Spartan  kings  to  evolve  from  the  condition  of  Tarquinian 
tyrants  to  that  of  tribunes  of  the  Gracchan  kind;  the  fall  of  the  last  Tarquins 
or  the  institution  of  the  Decemvirs  — a emp  d^Hat  of  one  kind  or  another 
against  the  tribunician  tendency  ^ — corresponds  more  or  less  to  the  fall 
of  Cleomcnes  (488)  and  of  Pausanias  C470);  and  the  revolution  of  Agis  III  and 
Cleomencs  III  (about  140)  aligns  itself  with  the  political  activity  of  C.  Flamin- 
ius,  which  began  only  a few  years  later.  But  never  in  Sparta  were  the  kings 
able  to  achieve  any  thorough-going  success  over  the  senatorial  element  repre- 
sented by  the  Ephors. 

In  the  period  of  these  struggles,  Rome  had  become  a megalopolis  of  the  late- 

^ What  is  important  to  ns,  therefore,  in  the  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  is  not  the  supposed  con- 
tents (of  which  scarcely  an  authentic  clause  survived  even  in  Cicero’s  day),  but  the  political  act 
of  codification  itself,  the  tendency  of  which  corresponded  to  that  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Tarquinian 
Tyrannis  by  senatorial  Oligarchy  — a success  which,  now  endangered,  it  was  sought  to  stabilize 
for  the  future.  The  text  which  schoolboys  learned  in  detail  in  Csesar’s  time  must  have  had  the 
same  destiny  as  the  consular  lists  of  the  old  time,  in  which  had  been  interpolated  names  upon  names 
of  families  whose  wealth  and  influence  was  of  much  later  origin.  In  recent  years  Pais  and  Lambert 
have  disputed  the  whole  story  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  so  far  as  concerns  the  authenticity  of  the 
reputed  text,  they  may  well  be  right  — not  so,  however,  as  regards  the  course  of  political  events  in 
the  years  about  450. 

2 Only  half  a century  separates  the  traditional  dates  of  these  events  (509,451),  in  spite  of  the 
wealth  of  traditional  history  afterwards  attached  to  the  period.  The  “coup,”  in  the  case  of  the 
Decemvirs,  was  the  capture  by  the  patricians  of  a machine  set  up  for  the  redress  of  plebeian  griev- 
ances. — Tf. 


66  THE  'DECLINE  OF  THE'  WEST. 

Classical  type.  TEe  rustic  instincts  were  more  and  more  pushed  back  by  the 
intelligence  of  the  city.^  Consequently  from  about  350  we  find  side  by  side 
with  the  kx  rogata  of  the  people  the  kx  data^  the  administrative  law,  of  the 
prsetor.  With  this  the  Twelve  Tables  idea  drops  out  of  the  contest  and  it  is 
the  praston  s edict  that  becomes  the  football  of  the  party  battle. 

It  did  not  take  long  for  the  praetor  to  become  the  centre  of  both  legislation 
and  iudicial  practice.  And  presently,  corresponding  to  the  political  extension 
of  the  city’s  power,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  praetor  and  the  field  of  his  jus  cimk  — 
the  law  of  the  citizens  — begin  to  diminish  in  significance  and  the  peregrin 
praetor  with  his  jus  gentium  — the  law  of  the  alien  — steps  into  the  foreground. 
And  when  finally  the  whole  population  of  the  Classical  world,  save  the  small 
part  possessing  Roman  citizenship,  was  comprised  in  the  field  of  this  alien  law, 
the  jus  peregrinum  of  the  city  of  Rome  became  practically  an  imperial  law.  All 
other  cities  — and  even  Alpine  tribes  and  migrant  Bedouin  clans  were  cimtates 
from  the  administrative  point  of  view  — retained  their  local  laws  only  as 
supplements,  not  alternatives,  to  the  peregrin  law  of  Rome. 

It  marked  the  close  of  Classical  law-making,  therefore,  when  Hadrian 
(about  A.D.  130)  introduced  the  Edictum  perpetuum^  which  gave  final  form  to  the 
well-established  corpus  of  the  annual  pronouncements  of  the  pr^tors  and  for- 
bade further  modifications  thereof.  It  was  still,  as  before,  the  praetor’s  duty 
to  publish  the  “ law  of  his  year,”  but,  even  though  this  law  had  no  greater  de- 
gree of  validity  than  corresponded  to  his  administrative  powers  and  was  not  the 
law  of  the  Empire,  he  was  obliged  thenceforth  to  stick  to  the  established  text.^ 
It  is  the  very  symbol  of  the  petrified  “Late’*  Civilization.® 

With  the  Hellenistic  age  began  jurisprudence,  the  science  of  law,  the  system- 
atic comprehension  of  the  law  which  men  actually  apply.  Since  legal  thought 
presupposes  a substance  of  political  and  economic  relations,  in  the  same  way  as 
mathematical  thought  presupposes  physical  and  technical  elements  of  knowl- 
edge,^ Rome  very  soon  became  the  home  of  Classical  jurisprudence.  Similarly  in  the 
Mexican  world  it  was  the  conquering  Aztecs  whose  academies  (e.g.,  Tezcuco) 
made  law  the  chief  subject  of  study.  Classical  jurisprudence  was  the  Roman’s 
science,  and  his  only  one.  At  the  very  moment  when  the  creative  mathematic 
closes  olF  with  Archimedes,  juristic  literature  begins  with  iElius’s  Tripertita^  a 
commentary  on  the  Twelve  (198  b.c.).^  The  first  systematic  private  law  was 
written  by  M.  Sca^vola  about  100.  The  genuine  maturity  of  Classical  law  is  in 
the  two  centuries  ioo~o  — although  we  to-day,  with  quaint  perversity,  apply 

1 a.  Ch.  IV  belov7. 

^ Sohm,  Institutionm  (14)  p.  loi.  [This  is  the  edict  of  “Julian*’  (Salvius  JuHanus,  urban  prsc- 
tor).  Romanists  are  not  agreed  as  to  how  far,  if  at  all,  it  included  material  derived  from  the  deci- 
sions of  the  peregrin  prsetor.  See  Professor  Goudy’s  article  “Roman  Law,”  Ency,  Brit,,  XI  cd., 
p.  563.  — Tf.] 

* Lenel,  Das  Edictum  -perpetuum  (1907);  L.  Wenger,  p.  168. 

^ Even  the  multiplication  table  of  the  children  assumes  the  elements  of  dynamics  in  counting. 

® V.  Mayrn,  i,  p,  85;  Sohm,  p.  105. 


'■  THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  67 

the  time  to  a period  which  was  really  that  of  Early  Arabian  law.  And  from  the 
relics  of  these  two  literatures  we  can  measure  the  greatness  of  the  gap  that 
separates  the  thought  of  two  Cultures.  The  Romans  treat  only  of  cases  and 
their  classification;  they  never  analyse  a basic  idea  such  as,  for  instance, 
judicial  error.  They  distinguish  carefully  the  sorts  of  contracts,  but  they  have 
no  conception  of  Contract  as  an  idea,  or  of  any  theories  as  to  invalidity  or 
unsoundness.  ‘‘Taking  everything  into  account,**  says  Lenel,^  “it  is  clear  that 
the  Romans  cannot  possibly  be  regarded  as  exemplars  of  scientific  method.’* 

The  last  phase  is  that  of  the  schools  of  the  Sabiniani  and  Proculiani  (Au- 
gustus to  about  160  A.D.).  They  are  scientific  schools  like  the  philosophical 
schools  in  Athens,  and  in  them,  possibly,  the  expiring  stages  of  the  conflict 
between  the  senatorial  and  the  tribunician  (Caesarian)  conceptions  of  law  were 
fought,  for  amongst  the  best  of  the  Sabiniani  were  two  descendants  of  Caesar’s 
slayers  and  one  of  the  Proculiani  was  picked  upon  by  Trajan  as  his  potential 
successor.  While  the  method  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  settled  and  con- 
cluded, the  practical  fusion  of  the  citizen’s  statute-law  (jus  civile)  and  the 
prsetor’s  edict  (jus  honorarium)  was  carried  out  here. 

The  last  landmark  of  Classical  jurisprudence,  so  far  as  we  know,  was  the 
Institutes  of  Gains  (about  161). 

Classical  law  is  a law  of  bodies.  In  the  general  stock  composing  the  world  it 
distinguishes  bodily  Persons  and  bodily  Things  and,  like  a sort  of  Euclidean 
mathematic  of  public  life,  establishes  ratios  between  them.  The  affinity  be- 
tween mathematical  and  legal  thought  is  very  close.  The  intention,  in  both, 
is  to  take  the  prima  facie  data,  to  separate  out  the  sensuous-incidental,  and  to 
find  the  intellectually  basic  principle  — the  fure  form  of  the  object,  the  pure 
type  of  the  situation,  the  pure  connexity  of  cause  and  effect.  Life,  in  the 
Classical,  presents  itself  to  the  critical  waking-consciousness  of  the  Classical 
man  in  a form  penetrated  with  Euclidean  character,  and  the  image  that  is  gen- 
erated in  the  legal  mind  is  one  of  bodies,  of  positional  relations  between  bodies, 
and  of  reciprocal  effects  of  bodies  by  contact  and  reaction — just  as  with 
Democritus’s  atoms.  It  is  juristic  statics:^ 

: V ■■  ■' 

The  first  creation  of  “ Arabian”  law  was  the  concept  of  the  incorporeal  person. 

Here  is  an  element  entirely  absent  in  Classical  law,®  and  appearing  quite 
suddenly  in  the  “ Classical”  jurists  (who  were  all  Aramaeans),  which  cannot  be 
estimated  at  its  full  value,  or  in  its  symbolic  importance  as  an  index  of  the  new 

^ Entcyklopadie  der  Rechswissensch.^1, 

^ Egyptian  law  of  the  Hyksos  period,  and  Chinese  of  the  Period  of  Contending  States,  in  contrast 
to  the  Classical  and  the  Indian  law  of  the  Dharmasutras,  hrnst  have  been  built  up  on  basic  ideas  quite 
other  than  the  idea  of  the  corporeality  of  persons  and  things.  It  would  be  a grand  emancipation  from 
the  load  of  Roman  “ antiquities  if  German  research  were  to  succeed  in  establishing  these. 

® Sohm,  p.  20.0. 


. ' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

worM-fceling^  unless  wc  reaike  the  full  extent  of  the  field  that  this  *'AraWaG'* 
law  covered. 

The  new  landscape  embraces  Syria  and  northern  Mesopotamia,  southern 
Arabia  and  Byzantium.  In  all  these  regions  a new  law  was  coming  into  being, 
an  oral  or  written  customary  law  of  the  same  “early"’  type  as  that  met  with  in 
the  SachsenpkgeL  Wonderfully,  the  law  of  individual  cities  which  is  so  self-evident 
on  Classical  ground  is  here  silently  transmuted  into  a law  of  creed-commumties,: 
It  is  Magian,  magic,  through  and  through.  Always  one  Pneuma,  one  like  spirit, 
one  identical  knowledge  and  comprehension  of  whole  and  sole  truth,  welds  the 
believers  of  the  same  religion  into  a unit  of  will  and  action,  into  one  juristic 
person,  A juristic  person  is  thus  a collective  entity  which  has  intentions, 
resolutions,  and  responsibilities  as  an  entity.  In  Christianity  we  see  the  idea 
already  actual  and  effective  in  the  primitive  community  at  Jerusalem,^  and 
presently  it  soars  to  the  conception  of  a triune  Godhead  of  three  Persons.^ 

Before  Constantine,  even,  the  Late  Classical  law  of  imperial  decrees  (con^ 
stitutiones,  placita')  though  the  Roman  form  of  city  law  was  strictly  kept,  was 
genuinely  a law  for  the  believers  of  the  **  Syncretic  Church^'*  ® that  mass  of  cults 
perfused  by  one  single  religiousness.  In  Rome  itself,  it  is  true,  law  was  conceived 
of  by  a large  part  of  the  population  as  city-state  law,  but  this  feeling  became 
weaker  and  weaker  with  every  step  towards  the  East.  The  fusion  of  the  faith- 
ful into  a single  jural  community  was  effected  in  express  form  by  the  Emperor- 
cult,  which  was  religious  law  through  and  through.  In  relation  to  this  law 
Jews  and  Christians  ^ were  infidels  who  ensconced  themselves  with  their  own 
laws  in  another  field  of  law.  When  in  xix  the  Aramaean  Caracalla,  by  the 
Constitutio  Antoniana,  gsLve  Romm  citizenshi-p  to  all  inhabitants  except  dediticii 
peregrins,®  the  form  of  his  act  was  purely  Classical,  and  no  doubt  there  were 
plenty  of  people  who  understood  it  in  the  Classical  spirit  — i.e.,  as  literally  an 
incorporation  of  the  citizens  of  every  other  city  in  the  city  of  Rome.  But  the 
Emperor  himself  conceived  it  quite  otherwise.  It  made  everyone  subject  to  the 
“ Ruler  of  the  Faithful,”  the  head  of  the  cult-religion  venerated  as  Divus,  With 

^ Acts  XV.  Herein  lies  the  germ  of  the  idea  of  a Church  law. 

* For  Islam  as  a “ juristic  person’*  see  M.  Horten,  Die  religiose Gedanhenwelt desVolkes imheutigem 
Islam  C1917),  p.  xxiv. 

^ Sec  Ch.  VII  below.  We  can  venture  to  make  the  label  so  positive  because  the  adherents  of  all 
the  Late  Classical  cults  were  bound  together  in  devout  consensus,  just  as  the  primitive  Christian 
communities  were. 

^ The  Persian  Church  came  into  the  Classical  field  only  in  the  Classical  form  of  Mithraism, 
which  was  assimilable  in  the  ensemble  of  Syncretism. 

® It  is  difficult  to  describe  this  class  in  a few  words.  Roughly,  they  (and  the  “Junian  Latins,’* 
so  called,  who  were  excepted  with  them)  represented  a stratum  of  Roman  society,  largely  com- 
posed of  “undesirables,"  which  was  only  just  not  servile.  In  the  older  legislation  they  were  neces- 
sarily lumpd  with  the  outer  world  as  peregrins,  but  when  Caracalla  made  this  outer  world 
“Roman,"  there  were  obvious  reasons  against  bringing  these  people  into  the  fold  as  well.  In  some- 
what the  same  way  the  word  “outsider"  is  used  in  colloquial  English  with  the  dual  meaning  of  a 
foreigner  or  non-member,  and  a socially  undesirable  person.  — Tr. 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  ' 69 

Constantine  came  the  great  change;  he  turned  Imperial  Caliph  law  on  to  the 
crced-coinmuiiity  of  Christianity  in  lieu  of  that  of  Syncretism,  and  thereby  tmr/- 
'tuud  the  Christian  Nation.  The  labels  “ devout'  * and  “ unbeliever’  ’ changed  places. 
From  Gonstantine  onwards  the  quiet  transformation  of  “Roman”  law  into 
orthodox  Christian  law  proceeded  more  and  more  decisively,  and  it  was  as  such 
that  converted  Asiatics  and  Germans  received  and  adopted  it.  Thus  a perfectly 
new  law  came  into  being  in  old  forms.  According  to  the  old  marriage-law  it  was 
impossible  for  a Roman  burgher  to  marry  the  daughter  of,  say,  a Capuan  burgher 
if  legal  community,  connubium,  was  not  in  force  between  the  two  cities.^  But 
now  the  question  was  whether  a Christian  or  a Jew  — irrespective  of  whether 
he  was  Roman,  Syrian,  or  Moor — - could  legally  marry  an  infidel.  For 
in  the  Magian  law-world  there  was  no  connuhium  between  those  of  different 
faiths.  There  was  not  the  slightest  difficulty  about  an  Irishman  in  Con- 
stantinople marrying  a Negress  if  both  were  Christians,  but  how  could  a 
Monophysite  Christian  marry  a Nestorian  maiden  who  was  his  neighbour  in 
their  Syrian  village?  Racially  they  were  probably  indistinguishable,  but  they 
belonged  to  legally  different  nations. 

This  Arabian  concept  of  nationality  is  a new  and  wholly  decisive  fact. 
The  frontiers  between  “home”  and  “abroad”  lay  in  the  Apollinian  world 
between  every  two  towns,  and  in  the  Magian  between  every  two  creed-com- 
munities. What  the  “enemy,”  the  peregrin,  was  to  the  Roman,  the  Pagan 
was  to  the  Christian,  the  Amhaarez  to  the  Jew.  What  the  acquisition  of  Roman 
citizenship  meant  for  the  Gaul  or  the  Greek  in  Cassar’s  time,  Christian  baptism 
meant  for  him  now  — entry  into  the  leading  nation  of  the  leading  Culture.^ 
The  Persians  of  the  Sassanid  period  no  longer  conceived  of  themselves,  as  their 
predecessors  of  Achasmenid  times  had  done,  as  a unit  by  virtue  of  origin  and 
speech,  but  as  a unit  of  Mazdaist  believers,  vis-h-vis  unbelievers,  irrespective  of 
the  fact  that  the  latter  might  be  of  pure  Persian  origin  (as  indeed  the  bulk  of 
the  Nestorians  were).  So  also  with  the  Jews,  and  later  the  Mandasans  and 
Manichseans,  and  later  again  the  Monophysite  and  the  Nestorian  Christians  — 
each  body  felt  itself  a nation,  a legal  community,  a juristic  person  in  a new 
sense. 

Thus  there  arises  a group  of  Early  Arabian  laws,  differentiated  according  to 
religions  as  decisively  as  Classical  laws  are  differentiated  according  to  cities. 
In  the  realm  of  the  Sassanids  schools  arose  for  the  teaching  the  Zoroastrian 
law  proper  to  them;  the  Jews,  who  formed  an  exceedingly  large  portion  of  the 
population  from  Armenia  to  Sabasa,  created  their  proper  law  in  the  Talmud, 
which  was  completed  and  closed  some  few  years  before  the  Corpus  Juris.  Each 
one  of  these  Churches  had  its  peculiar  jurisdiction,  independent  of  the  geo- 

^ In  the  Twelve  Tables  connuhium  was  disallowil  even  between  the  patrician  and  plebian  citi- 
zens of  Rome  itself.  [The  hold  of  the  patricians  on  this  privilege,  however,  was  already  exceedingly 
precarious,  and  it  vanished  a few  years  later  in  the  Ux  CanuUia,  — Tr.] 

2 O.  Ch.  VI  below. 


, the  decline  of  the  west  ; , 

graphical  frotitiers  of  the  tEoment  — as  in  the  East  to-day — and  the  judge 
representing  the  ground-lord  judged  only  cases  between  parties  of  different 
faiths.  The  self-jurisdiction  of  the  Jews  within  the  Empire  had  ne¥er  been 
contested  by  anyone,  but  the  Nestorians  and  the  Monophysites  also  began, 
¥ery  soon  after  their  separation,  to  create  and  to  apply  laws  of  their  own, 
and  thus  by  a negative  process  — i.e.,  by  the  gradual  withdrawal  of  all  heter- 
odox cominunities  — - Roman  imperial  law  came  to  be  the  law  of  the  Christians 
who  confessed  the  same  creed  as  the  Emperor.  Hence  the  importance  of  the 
Roman-Syrian  law-book,  which  has  been  preserved  in  several  languages . It 
was  probably  ^ pre-Constantinian  and  written  in  the  chancery  of  the  Patriarch 
of  Antioch;  it  is  quite  unmistakably  Early  Arabian  law  in  Late  Classical  form, 
and,  as  its  many  translations  indicate,  it  owed  its  currency  to  the  opposition 
to  the  orthodox  Imperial  Church.  It  was  without  doubt  the  basis  of  Mono- 
physite  law,  and  it  reigned  till  the  coming  of  Islam  over  a field  far  larger  than 
thzt  of  the  Corpus  Juris, 

The  question  arises,  what  in  such  a tapestry  of  laws  could  have  been  the  real 
practical  value  of  the  part  of  them  which  was  written  in  Latin?  The  law 
historians,  with  all  the  one-sidedness  of  the  expert,  have  hitherto  looked  at 
this  part  alone  and  therefore  have  not  yet  realized  that  there  is  a problem  here 
at  all.  Their  texts  were  “Law”  unqualified,  the  law  that  descended  from 
Rome  to  us,  and  they  were  concerned  only  to  investigate  the  history  of  these 
texts  and  not  their  real  significance  in  the  lives  of  the  Eastern  peoples.  What 
in  reality  we  have  here  is  the  highly  civilized  law  of  an  aged  Culture  forced 
upon  the  springtime  of  a young  one.^  It  came  over  as  learned  literature,  and  in 
the  train  of  political  developments  which  were  quite  other  than  they  would 
have  been  had  Alexander  or  Cassar  lived  longer  or  had  Antony  won  at  Actium. 
We  must  look  at  Early  Arabian  law  from  the  standpoint  of  Ctesiphon  and  not 
from  that  of  Rome.  The  law  of  the  distant  West  had  long  before  reached  in- 
ward fulfilment  — could  it  be  here  more  than  a mere  literature?  What  part 
did  it  play,  if  any,  in  the  active  law-study,  law-making,  and  law-practice 
of  this  landscape?  And,  indeed  we  must  further  ask  how  much  of  Roman 
— or  for  that  matter  of  Classical  generally  — is  contained  in  this  literature 
itself.^ 

1 Lend,  I,  380, 

2 Here,  as  in  every  line  of  the  history  of  the  '‘Pscudomorphosis,’'  we  arc  reminded  of  Christ‘s 
parable  of  new  wine  and  old  bottles  (Matt,  ix,  17),  an  expression  not  of  mere  abstract  shrewdness, 
as  it  seems  to  us  now,  but  of  intense  living  force  and  even  passion.  It  is  only  one  short  verse,  not 
obligatory  in  its  context,  but  leaping  out  of  depths.  — Tr. 

2 As  long  ago  as  1891  Mitteis  ^ekhsrecht  md  Volksrecht,  p.  13)  drew  attention  to  the  Oriental 
vein  in  Constantine’s  legislation.  Collinet  (Mtudes  historiquts  sm  le  droit  de  Justinien  I,  1912.),  chiefly 
on  the  basis  of  German  researches,  throws  an  immense  amount  back  on  Hellenistic  law;  but  how 
much,  after  all,  of  this  “Hellenistic”  was  really  Greek  and  not  merely  written  in  Greek?  The 
results  of  interpolation-research  have  proved  truly  devastating  for  the  “Classical  spirit”  in  Jus- 
tiuian’s  Digests. 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  . 71 

The  history  of  this  Ladn-writtca  law  belongs  after  160  to  the  Arabian 
East;  and  it  says  a great  deal  that  it  can  be  traced  in  exactly  parallel  courses 
into  thcEistory  of  Jewish,  Christian,  and  Persian  literature^  The  “Classical" 
jurists  (i6o~iio),  Papinian,  Uipian,  and  Paul,  were  Aramxans,  and  Ulpian 
described  himself  with  pride  as  a Phoenician  from  Tyre.  They  came,  therefore, 
from  the  same  population  as  the  Tannaim  who  perfected  theMishnah  shortly 
afteraoo,  and  most  of  the  Christian  Apologists  (Tertullian  160-213).  Contempo- 
rary with  them  is  the  fixation  of  canon  and  text  for  the  New  Testament  by 
Christian,  for  the  Hebrew  Old  Testament  by  Jewish, ^ and  for  the  Avesta  by 
Persian,  scholars.  It  is  the  high  Scholasticism  of  the  Arabian  Springtime. 
The  digests  and  commentaries  of  these  jurists  stand  towards  the  petrified  legal 
store  of  the  Classical  in  exactly  the  same  relation  as  the  Mishnah  to  the  Torah 
of  Moses  (and  as,  much  later,  the  Hadith  to  the  Koran)  — they  are  “Halak- 
Ij^Qrh”  ^ — a new  customary  law  grasped  in  the  forms  of  an  authoritative  and 
traditional  law-materiaL  The  casuistic  method  is  ever5rwhere  the  same.  The 
Babylonian  Jews  possessed  a well-developed  civil  law  which  was  taught  in  the 
academies  of  Sura  and  Pumbeditha.  Everywhere  a class  of  law-men  formed 
itself — the  pudmtss  of  the  Christians,  the  rabbis  of  the  Jews,  later  the  ulemas 
(in  Perian,  moilahs)  of  the  Islamic  nation  — who  enunciated  opinions,  resfonsa 
(Arabic,  Fetwa),  If  the  Ulema  was  acknowledged  by  the  States  he  was  called 
“ Mufti " (Byzantine,  ex  auctontate  frincipis).  Everywhere  the  forms  are  exactly 
the  same. 

About  zoo  the  Apologists  pass  into  the  Fathers  proper,  the  Tannaim  into 
the  Amoraim,  the  great  casuists  of  juridical  law  (jus)  into  the  exegetes  and 
codifiers  of  constitutional  law  (lex).  The  constitutions  of  the  Emperors,  from 
zoo  the  sole  source  of  new  “Roma|i’*  law,  are  again  a new  “Halakhah"  laid 
down  over  that  in  the  jurists’  writings,  and  therefore  correspond  exactly  to  the 
Gemara,  which  rapidly  evolved  as  an  outlier  of  the  Mishnah.  The  new 
tendencies  reached  fulfilment  simultaneously  in  the  Corpus  Juris  and  the 
Talmud.. 

The  opposition  between  jus  and  /(?x  in  Arabian-Latin  usage  comes  to  ex- 
pression very  clearly  in  the  work  of  Justinian.  Institutes  and  Digests  arc 
jus;  they  have  essentially  the  significance  of  canonical  texts.  Constitutions 
and  Novels  are  leges,  new  law  in  the  form  of  elucidations.  The  canonical  books 
of  the  New  Testament  and  the  traditions  of  the  Fathers  arc  related  to  one 
another  in  the  same  way. 

As  to  the  Oriental  character  of  the  thousands  of  constitutions,  no  one  now 
has  any  doubts.  It  is  pure  customary  law  of  the  Arabian  world  that  the  living 

^ See  Ch.  VII  below. 

2 Coupled  with  the  destruction  of  all  other  documents. 

® Fromcr,  I>er  Talmud  (192.0),  p.  190.  [The  English  student  will  find  a fairly  foil  account  of 
the  main  groups  of  Jewish  literature  in  the  article  "‘Hebrew  Literature*"  and  cognate  articles  in 
the  Enoy,  Brit,,  XI  ed.  — Tf.] 


7x  OF  THE  WEST 

pressure  of  evolntioii  forced  under  the  texts  of  the  learned.^  The  innusierablc 
decrees  of  the  Christian  rulers  of  By2:antium5  of  the  Persian  of  Ctesiphon,  of  the 
Jewish  (the  Resh-Galuta  0 Babylonia,  and  finally  of  the  Caliphs  of  Islam 
have  all  exactly  the  same  significance. 

But  what  significance  had  the  other  part  of  pseudo-Classical,  the  old  jurists*, 
law?  Here  it  is  not  enough  to  explain  texts,  and  we  must  know  what  was  the 
relation  between  texts,  jurisprudence,  and  court  decisions.  It  can  happen 
that  one  and  the  same  law-book  is,  in  the  waking-consciousness  of  two  groups 
of  peoples,  equivalent  to  two  fundamentally  different  works. 

It  was  not  long  before  it  became  the  habit,  not  to  apply  the  old  laws  of  the 
city  of  Rome  to  the  fact-material  of  the  given  case,  but  to  quote  the  jurists* 
texts  like  the  Bible.^  What  does  this  signify?  For  our  Romanists  it  is  a sign 
of  decadence,  but  looked  at  from  the  view-point  of  the  Arabian  world,  it  is  just 
the  reverse  — a proof  that  Arabian  man  did  eventually  succeed  in  making  an 
alien  and  imposed  literature  inwardly  his  own,  in  the  form  admissible  for  his 
own  world-feeling.  With  this  the  completeness  of  the  opposition  between 
the  Classical  and  the  Arabian  world-feeling  becomes  manifest. 

VI 

Whereas  the  Classical  law  was  made  by  burghers  on  the  basis  of  practical 
experience,  the  Arabian  came  from  God,  who  manifested  it  through  the  in- 
tellect of  chosen  and  enlightened  men.  The  Roman  distinction  between 
and  fas  (such  as  it  was,  for  the  content  even  of  fas  had  proceeded  from  human 
reflection)  became  meaningless.  The  law,  of  whatever  kind,  spiritual  or  sec- 
ular, came  into  being,  as  stated  in  the  first  words  of  Justinian’s  Digests,  Deo 
auctore.  The  authoritativeness  of  Classical  laws  rests  upon  their  success,  that 
of  the  Arabian  on  the  majesty  of  the  name  that  they  bear.^  But  it  matters  very 
considerably  indeed  in  a man’s  feelings  whether  he  regards  law  as  an  expression 
of  some  fellow  man’s  will  or  as  an  element  of  the  divine  dispensation.  In  the 
one  case  he  either  sees  for  himself  that  the  law  is  right  or  else  yields  to  force, 
but  in  the  other  he  devoutly  acknowledges  Q'  Islatn"  - to  commit,  devote). 
The  Oriental  does  not  ask  to  see  either  the  practical  object  of  the  law  that  is  ap- 
plied to  him  or  the  logical  grounds  of  its  judgments.  The  relation  of  the  cadi  to 
the  people,  therefore,  has  nothing  in  common  with  that  of  the  prxtor  to  the 
citizens.  The  latter  bases  his  decisions  upon  an  insight  trained  and  tested  in 
high  positions,  the  former  upon  a spirit  that  is  effective  and  immanent  in  him 

^ Mittcis  (^Kom,  Privatncht  his  auf  die  Zeit  (1908),  preface)  remarks  how,  “while 

the  ancient  law-forms  were  retained,  the  Jaw  itself  nevertheless  became  something  quite  different." 

* Head  of  the  exilic  Jews  under  Persian  over  lordship. — Tf. 

® Mayr,  IV,  pp.  45,  ct  scq. 

^ Hence  the  fictitious  names  of  authors  on  innumerable  books  in  every  Arabian  literature  — “ 

Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  Pythagoras,  Hermes  Trismegistus,  Hippocrates,  Enoch,  Baruch,  Daniel, 
Solomon,  the  Apostle-names  attached  to  the  numerous  gospels  and  apocalypses. 


73 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES 

and  speaks  through  Ms  mouth.  But  it  follows  from  this  that  their  respective tc- 
latioQS  to  written  law  — the  prartor’s  to  his  edict,  the  cadi^s  to  the  jurists.Vtexts , 
— . juiist  he  eGtircijT' diffcrciit*  It  is  a 'C^umtesscnce  of  concentrated  experience' that 
the  pr^tor  makes  his  own,  but  the  texts  are  a sort  of  oracle  that  the  cadi  esoteri- 
cally  questions.  It  docs  not  mattef  in  the  least  to  the  cadi  what  a passage  origi- 
nally meant  or  why  it  was  framed.  He  consults  the  words  — evm  the  kmrs  — 
and  be  does  so  not  at  all  for  their  everyday  meanings,  but  for  the  magic  rela- 
tions in  which  they  must  stand  towards  the  case  before  him.  We  know  this 
relation  of  the  “spirit’*  to  the  “letter”  from  the  Gnosis,  from  the  early- 
Christian,  Jewish,  and  Persian  apocalyptic  and  mystical  literature,  from  the 
Neopythagorcan  philosophy,  from  the  Kabbalah;  and  there  is  not  the  slightest 
doubt  that  the  Latin  codices  were  used  in  exactly  the  same  way  in  the  minor 
judicial  practice  of  the  Aramaean  world.  The  conviction  that  the  letters  con- 
tain secret  meanings,  penetrated  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  finds  imaginative  ex- 
pression in  the  fact  (mentioned  above)  that  all  religions  of  the  Arabian  world 
formed  scripts  of  their  own,  in  which  the  holy  books  had  to  be  written  and 
which  maintained  themselves  with  astounding  tenacity  as  badges  of  the  re- 
spective “nations**  even  after  changes  of  language.^ 

But  even  in  law  the  basis  of  determining  the  truth  by  a majority  of  texts  is  the 
fact  of  the  consensus  of  the  spiritual  elect,  the  ijma^  This  theory  Islamic  science 
worked  out  to  its  logical  conclusions.  We  seek  to  find  the  truth,  each  for 
himself,  by  personal  pondering,  but  the  Arabian  savant  feels  for  and  ascertains 
the  general  conviction  of  his  associates,  which  cannot  err  because  the  mind  of 
God  and  the  mind  of  the  community  are  the  same.  If  consensus  is  found,  truth  is 
established.  I jma**  is  the  key  of  all  Early  Christian,  Jewish,  and  Persian 
Councils,  but  it  is  the  key,  too,  of  the  famous  Law  of  Citations  of  Valen- 
tinian  III  (4x6),  which  the  law-men  have  universally  ridiculed  without  in  the 
least  understanding  its  spiritual  foundations.  The  law  limits  the  number  of 
great  jurists  whose  texts  were  allowed  to  be  cited  to  five,  and  thus  set  up  a 
canon  — in  the  same  sense  as  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  both  of  which  also 
were  summations  of  texts  which  might  be  cited  as  canonical.  If  opinions 
differed,  the  law  of  Valentinian  laid  it  down  that  a majority  should  prevail, 
or  if  the  texts  were  equally  divided,  the  authority  of  Papinian.®  The  inter- 
polation method,  used  on  a large  scale  by  Tribonian  for  the  Digest  of  Justinian, 

^ For  example,  Hebrew  was  supplanted  by  Aramaic  for  all  ordinary  purposes  as  early  as  the 
Maccabees  — and  to  such  an  extent  that  in  the  synagogues  the  Scriptures  had  to  be  translated  for 
the  people  — but  has  held  its  ground  as  a religious  vehicle,  and  above  all  as  a script,  even  to  this 
day.  (The  present  use  of  a spohm  Hebrew  represents  a revival  in  more  recent  times,  after  the  wider 
dispersion  of  the  early  Middle  Ages  had  broken  the  connexion  with  the  Aramaic  lands.)  In  the 
Persian  field  the  older  Zend  survived  alongside  the  newer  Pchlcvi.  In  Egypt  somewhat  similar  in- 
fluences, were  contemporaneously  determining  the  evolution  of  popular  Demotic  and  ofl5.cial  Greek 
into  the  Coptic  language  with  Greek  characters.  — Tf. 

® M.  Horten,  D.  rcL  Gedanhmwelt  d,  Volhss  im  heut,  Islam,  p.  xvi.  Cf.  Chapter  VH  below, 

* Mayr,  IV,  45,  et  seq.  [Ency,  Brit.y  XI  ed,,  Vol.,  XXIII,  p.  570.  — Tr.] 


74'^,::  , THE  DECLINE  OF- THE  WEST  ; 

is  a product  of  this  same  outlook.  A canonical  text  is  in  its  very  idea  true  and 
incapable  of  improvement.  But  the  actual  needs  of  the  spirit  alter,  and  so 
there  grew  up  a technique  of  secret  modifications  which  outwardly  kept  up  the 
fiction  of  inalterability  and  which  is  employed  very  freely  indeed  in  all  religious 
writings  of  the  Arabian  world,  the  Bible  induded. 

After  Mark  Antony,  Justinian  is  the  most  fateful  personality  of  the  Arabian 
world-  Like  his  “contemporary*'  Charles  V he  ruined  everything  for  which 
he  was  invoked.  Just  as  in  the  West  the  Faustian  dream  of  a resurrection  of 
the  Holy  Roman  Empire  runs  through  all  the  political  romanticism  that 
darkened  the  sense  of  fact  during  and  beyond  the  age  of  Napoleon  — and  even 
that  of  the  princely  fools  of  1848  — so  also  Justinian  was  possessed  with  a 
Quixotic  urgency  to  recover  the  entire  Imperium.  It  was  always  upon  dis- 
tant Rome  instead  of  upon  his  proper  world,  the  Eastern,  that  his  eyes  were 
fixed.  Even  before  he  ascended  the  throne,  he  was  already  in  negotiation  with 
the  Pope  of  Rome,  who  was  still  subordinate  to  the  great  Patriarch  of  Christen- 
dom and  not  yet  generally  recognized  even  as  primus  inur  pares.  It  was  at  the 
Pope's  instance  that  the  dual-nature  symbol  was  introduced  at  Chalcedon,^  a 
step  which  lost  the  Monophysite  countries  wholly  and  for  ever.  The  conse- 
quence of  Actium  was  that  Christianity  in  its  first  two  decisive  and  formative 
centuries  was  pulled  over  into  the  West,  into  Classical  territories,  where  the 
higher  intellectual  stratum  held  aloof.  Then  the  Early  Christian  spirit  rose 
afresh  with  the  Monophysites  and  Nestorians.  But  Justinian  thrust  this  re- 
vival back  upon  itself,  and  the  result  was  that  in  the  realms  of  Eastern  Christ- 
ianity the  reformist  movement,  when  in  due  course  it  appeared,  was  not  a 
Puritanism  but  the  new  religion  of  Islam.  And  in  the  same  way,  at  the  very 
moment  when  the  Eastern  customary  law  had  become  ripe  for  codification,  he 
framed  a Latin  codex  which,  for  language  reasons  in  the  East  and  for  political 
reasons  in  the  West,  was  condemned  from  the  first  to  remain  a literary  prod- 
uct. 

The  work  itself,  like  the  corresponding  codes  of  Dracon  and  Solon,  came 
into  being  at  the  threshold  of  a “Late"  period,  and  with  political  intentions. 
In  the  West,  where  the  fiction  of  a continuing  Imperium  Komanum  produced  the 
utterly  meaningless  campaigns  of  Belisarius  and  Narses,  Latin  codes  had  been 
put  together  (about  a.d.  500)  by  Visigoths,  Burgundians  and  Ostrogoths  for 
subjugated  Romans,  and  so  Byzantium  must  needs  get  out  a genuine  Roman 
code  in  opposition.  In  the  East  the  Jewish  nation  has  already  settled  its  code, 
the  Talmud,  while,  for  the  immense  numbers  of  people  who  were  subject  to 
the  Emperor's  law,  a code  proper  for  the  Emperor’s  own  nation,  the  Christian, 
had  become  a necessity. 

For  the  Corpus  Juris  with  its  topsy-turviness  and  its  technical  faults  is,  in  spite 
of  everything,  an  Arabic  in  other  words,  a religious  — creation,  as  evidenced 

1 471.  See  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.,  article  “Chaicedoo.  CouadJ  of,‘*  and  references  therein.  — Tr. 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  ' 75 

in  the  Christian  tendency  of  many  interpolations;^  in  the  fact  that  the  constitu- 
tions relati¥c  to  ecclesiastical  law,  which  had  been  put  at  the  end  even  in  the 
Thcodosian  codex,  were  now  placed  at  the  beginning;  and  very  markedly  in 
the  preambles  of  many  of  the  Novels*  Yet  the  book  is  not  a beginning,  but  an 
end.  Latin,  which  had  long  become  valueless,  now  disappears  completely  from 
legal  life  (even  the  Novels  are  mostly  in  Greek),  and  with  it  the  work  so  mis- 
guidcdly  written  in  that  language.  But  the  history  of  the  law  pursues  the  way 
that  the  Syrian-Roman  law-book  had  indicated  to  it,  and  in  the  eighth  century 
arrives  at  works  in  the  mode  of  our  eighteenth,  such  as  the  Ecloga  of  the 
Emperor  Leo  ® and  the  Corpus  of  the  great  Persian  jurist  Archbishop  Jesubocht.® 
In  that  time,  too,  came  the  greatest  figure  of  Islamic  jurisprudence,  Abu  Hanifah. 

vn 

The  law-history  of  the  West  begins  in  total  independence  of  Justinian’s 
creation.  At  that  time  it  was  in  complete  oblivion,  so  thoroughly  unimpor- 
tant, in  fact,  that  of  its  main  element,  the  Pandects  (Digest),  there  was  but  one 
manuscript,  which  by  accident  (an  unfortunate  one)  was  discovered  about 
1050. 

The  pre-Cultural  phase,  from  about  a.d.  500,  had  thrown  up  a series  of 
Germanic  tribal  codes  — the  Visigothic,  Ostrogothic,  Burgundian,  Frankish, 
and  Lombard  — which  correspond  to  those  of  the  Arabian  pre-Culture  that 
survives  for  us  only  in  the  Jewish  A Deuteronomy  (c.  611,  more  or  less  our 
Deuteronomy  xii-xxvi)  and  Priestly  History  (r.  450,  now  represented 
by  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  books  of  the  Pentateuch).  Both  are  con- 
cerned with  the  values  of  basic  significance  for  a primitive  existence  — 
family  and  chattels  — and  both  make  use,  crudely,  yet  shrewdly,  of  an  old 
and  civilised  law  — the  Jews  (and  no  doubt  the  Persians  and  others)  working 
upon  the  late  Babylonian,®  and  the  Germans  upon  some  few  relics  qf  Urbs  Roma. 

The  political  life  of  the  Gothic  springtime,  with  its  peasant,  feudal,  and 
simple  burgher  laws,  leads  very  soon  to  particular  development  in  three  great 
branches  of  law  which  have  remained  distinct  to  this  day  — and  there  has  been 
no  unifying  comparative  history  of  law  in  the  West  to  probe  the  deep  meaning 
of  this  development. 

The  most  important  by  far,  owing  to  the  political  destinies  in  which  it  was 
involved,  was  the  Norman  law,  which  was  borrowed  from  the  Frankish.  After 
the  Conquest  of  England  in  1066,  this  drove  out  the  native  Saxon,  and  since 

^ Wenger,  p.  180. 

® Knimbacher,  Byzantinische  Uteratur-Gischkhte^  p.  606. 

^ Sachau,  Syrische  Bcchtsbucher,  Vol.  III. 

^ Bertholet,  Ksilturgeschkhu  Israels ^ pp.  xcx),  ct  scq. 

^ We  ger  a hint  of  this  in  the  famous  code  of  Hammurabi,  though  unfortunately  we  cannot  tell 
in  what  relation  this  single  work  stood,  in  point  of  intrinsic  importance,  to  the  general  level  of 
contemporary  jurisprudence  in  the  Babylonian  world. 


76  : : .'THE  DECLINE'OF  THE  .WEST 

that  day  ill  Eagland  ‘^the  law  of  the  great  men  has  become  the  law  of  the 
whole  people/*  Its  purely  German  spirit  has  developed  it,  without  a catas- 
trophe, from  a feudal  regime  of  unparalleled  stringency  into  the  institutions 
of  the  present  day  which  have  become  law  in  Canada,  India,  Australia, 
South  Africa,  and  the  United  States.  Even  apart  from  the  extent  of  its  power, 
It  is  the  most  instructive  in  West  Europe.  Its  development,  unlike  that  of  the 
rest,  did  lie  in  the  hands  of  theoretical  jurists.  The  study  of  Roman  law  at 
Oxford  was  not  allowed  to  touch  practice;  and  at  Merton  in  1x36  the  higher 
nobility  expressly  rejected  it.  The  Bench  itself  continued  to  develop  the  old 
law-material  by  means  of  creative  precedents,  and  it  was  these  practical  de- 
cisions (“Reports”)  that  formed  the  basis  of  law-books  such  as  that  of  Brac- 
ton.^  Since  then,  and  to  this  day,  a statute  law,  kept  living  and  progressive 
by  the  court  decisions,  and  a common  law,  which  always  vividly  underlies  the 
legislation,  exist  side  by  side,  without  its  ever  becoming  necessary  for  the 
representatives  of  the  people  to  make  single  large  efforts  at  codification. 

In  the  South,  the  law  of  the  German-Roman  codices  above  mentioned  pre- 
vailed — in  southern  France  the  Visigothic  (called  the  drok  krit  in  contrast 
to  the  droit  coutumkr  of  the  north),  and  in  Italy  the  Lombard 

(which  was  the  most  important  of  them,  was  almost  purely  Germanic^ 
aiid  held  its  own  till  well  into  the  Renaissance).  Pavia  became  a study-centre 
for  German  law  and  produced  about  1070  the  **  Exposim^  by  far  the  greatest 
achievement  of  juridical  science  in  the  age,  and  immediately  after  it  a code,  the 
**  Lombardad'^  The  legal  evolution  of  the  entire  South  was  broken  off  fay 
Napoleon’s  Code  Civil,  which  took  its  place.  But  this  in  turn  has  become  in  all 
Latin  lands  and  far  beyond  them  the  basis  for  further  creative  work  — and 
hence,  after  the  English,  it  is  the  most  important. 

In  Germany,  the  movement  that  set  in  so  powerfully  with  the  Gothic 
tribal  laws  (Sachsenspiegel,  1x30;  Schwabenspiegel,  1x74)  frittered  itself  away  to 
nullity.  A host  of  petty  civic  and  territorial  rights  went  on  springing  up 
until  indignation  with  the  facts  induced  an  unreal  political  romanticism  in 
dreamers  and  enthusiasts,  the  Emperor  Maximilian  among  them,  and  law  came 
under  attack  with  the  rest.  The  Diet  of  Worms  in  1495  framed  its  "Kammer- 
gerichtsordnung^  ^ after  an  Italian  model.  Now  there  was  not  only  the  “Holy 
Roman  Empire”  on  German  ground,  but  “Roman  law”  as  German  common- 
law.  The  old  German  procedures  were  exchanged  for  Italian.  The  judges 
had  to  study  their  law  beyond  the  Alps,  and  obtained  their  experience  not  from 
the  ambient  life,  but  from  a logic-chopping  philology.  In  this  country  alone 
are  to  be  found,  later,  the  ideologues  for  whom  the  Corpus  Juris  is  an  ark  to  be 
defended  against  the  profanation  of  realities. 

1 Sec  Professor  Maitland’s  article  ’‘English  Law”  in  Ency.  Bris.,  XI  cd.,  VoL  IX.  — Tr, 

^ Sohm,  Inst.,  p.  156. 

3 See  J.  Janssen,  Hist.  German  People  at  the  End  of  the  Middle  Ages,  English  translation.  Book  IV, 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  77 

What,  in  fact,  was  it  that  under  the  high-sonnding  name  passed  into  the 
intellectual  keeping  of  a handful  of  Gothic  men?  * About  1100,  at  the  University 
of  Bologna,  a German,  Irnerius,  had  made  that  unique  manuscript  of  the 
Pandects  the  object  of  a veritable  Scholasticism.  He  transferred  the  Lombard 
method  to  the  new  text,  “the  truth  of  which,  as  a ratio  scripta,  was  believed  in 
as  implicitly  as  the  Bible  and  Aristotle/*^  Truth!  — but  the  Gothic  under- 
standing, tied  to  the  Gothic  life-content,  was  incapable  even  of  distantly 
guessing  at  the  spirit  of  these  texts,  for  the  principles  fixed  in  them  were  the 
principles  of  a civilized  and  megalopolitan  life.  This  school  of  the  glossators, 
like  Scholasticism  in  general,  stood  under  the  spell  of  concept-realism;  as 
they  held  the  genuine  real,  the  substance  of  the  world,  to  be  not  in  things,  but 
in  universal  concepts,  so  they  maintained  that  the  law  was  to  be  found  not  in 
custom  and  usage  as  displayed  in  the  despised  ^ Lombarda^  but  in  the  manipula- 
tion of  abstract  notions.  Their  interest  in  the  book  was  purely  dialectical  ® 
— never  was  it  in  their  minds  to  apply  their  work  to  life.  It  was  only  after 
1300,  and  then  slowly,  that  their  anti-Lombard  glosses  and  summae  made  their 
way  into  the  cities  of  the  Renaissance.  The  jurists  of  the  Late  Gothic,  above 
all  Bartolus,  had  fused  canon  and  Germanic  law  into  one  whole  with  a definitely 
practical  intention,  and  into  it  they  brought  ideas  of  actuality  — here,  as  in 
Dracon's  code  and  the  Imperial  Edicts  from  Theodosius  to  Justinian,  the  actU' 
ality  of  a Culture  that  is  on  the  threshold  of  its  “Late”  stage.  It  was  th 
^nation  of  Bartolus  that  became  effective  in  Spain  and  Germany  as  “Roman  law”; 
only  in  France  did  the  jurists -of  the  Baroque,  after  Cujacius  and  Donellus,  get 
back  from  the  Scholastic  to  the  Byzantine  text. 

But  Bologna  witnessed,  besides  Irnerius's  achievement  in  abstraction,  an 
event  df  quite  other  and  decisive  import  — the  famous  Decretum  of  Gratian, 
written  about  1140.'^  This  created  the  Western  science  of  spiritual  law.  For  by 
bringing  the  old-Catholic,  Magian,  church-law,^  founded  in  the  Early-Arabian 
sacrament  of  baptism,®  into  a system,  it  provided  the  very  form  that  the  new- 
Catholic,  Faustian  Christianity  needed  for  the  jural  expression  of  its  own  being, 
which  reached  back  to  the  prime  sacrament  of  an  altar  and  a consecrated  priest- 
hood. With  the  Liber  extra  of  1x34  the  main  body  of  the  Corpus  Juris  Canonici  is 
complete.  What  the  Empire  had  failed  to  accomplish  — the  creation,  out  of 
the  immense  undeveloped  profusion  of  tribal  laws,  of  a general  Western  Corpus 
Juris  Germanict'  — the  Papacy  achieved.  There  came  into  existence  a com- 
plete private  law,  with  sanctions  and  processes,  produced  with  German  method 
out  of  the  ecclesiastical  and  secular  law-material  of  the  Gothic.  This  is  the 

1 Lead,  I,  p.  395.  . . ^ > 

2 The  punning  contrast  of  Lombard  patx  (excrement)  and  Roman  hx  is  Huguccio  s (lioo). 

® W.  Goetz,  Arch,  fur  KulfurgeschfchtCy  lo,  zS,  et  scq. 

^ See  the  article  “Canon  Law“  in  Ency.  Brif.,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 

® Sec  Sohm*s  last  work.  Das  altkatholiscbe  Kirchmrecht  und  das  Dehret  Grattans  (1918). 

« See  Ch.  Vn  bdow. 


78  ' ; ;'THE  DECLINE.  OF  THE  WEST,..  ,,.- 

law  called  which  presently,  after  Bartolus,  was  infused  into  all 

study  of  the  texts  of  Justinian  themselves.  And  it  shows  us,  in  the  domain  of 
jurisprudence  as  elsewhere,  that  great  dissidence,  inherent  in  the  Faustian, 
which  produced  the  gigantic  conflict  between  the  Papacy  and  the  Empire. 
The  distinction  between  fas  and  impossible  in  the  Arabian  world,  was 
inevitable  in  the  Western.  They  are  two  expressions  of  a will-to-powcr  over 
the  infinite,  but  the  will  behind  “temporal*'  legislation  is  rooted  in  custom 
and  lays  hands  on  the  generations  of  the  future,  while  that  of  “spirituar* 
originates  in  mystical  certainty  and  pronounces  a timeless  and  eternal  law.^ 
This  battle  between  equally  matched  opponents  has  never  yet  been  ended,  and 
it  is  visible  even  to-day  in  our  law  of  marriage,  with  its  opposition  of  the' 
ecclesiastical  and  the  civil  wedding. 

With  the  dawn  of  the  Baroque,  life,  having  by  that  time  assumed  urban 
and  money-economic  forms,  begins  to  demand  a law  like  that  of  the  Classical 
city-states  after  Solon.  The  purpose  of  the -prevailing  law  was  now  perfectly 
clear.  But  it  was  a fateful  legacy  from  the  Gothic  that  the  creation  of  “the 
law  inborn  in  us”  was  looked  upon  as  the  privilege  of  a learned  class,  and  this 
privilege  no  one  succeeded  in  shaking. 

Urban  rationalism  turned,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Sophists  and  the  Stoics,  to 
busy  itself  with  the  “law  of  nature,”  from  its  foundation  by  Oldendorp  and 
Bodinus  to  its  destruction  by  Hegel.  In  England  the  great  Coke  successfully 
defended  Germanic  self-developing  practical  law  against  the  last  attempts  of 
the  Tudors  to  introduce  Pandect  law.  But  on  the  Continent  the  systems  of  the 
learned  evolved  in  Roman  forms  right  down  to  the  state  codes  of  Germany  and 
the  schemes  of  the  Ancien  Regime  in  France  on  which  the  Code  Napoleon  was 
based.  And  therefore  Blackstone*s  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England  (1765)  is 
the  one  purely  Germanic  Code,  and  it  appeared  when  the  Faustian  Culture  had 
already  reached  the  threshold  of  its  Civilization. 

vin 

With  this  I reach  the  objective  and  look  around  me.  I see  three  law-his- 
tories, connected  merely  by  the  elements  of  verbal  and  syntactical  form,  taken 
over  by  one  from  another,  voluntarily  or  perforce,  but  never  revealing  to  the 
new  user  the  nature  of  the  alien  being  which  underlay  them.  Two  of  these 
histories  are  complete.  The  third  is  that  in  which  we  ourselves  are  standing 
— standing,  too,  at  a decisive  point  where  we  embark  in  our  turn  upon  the  big 
constructive  task  that  Rome  and  Islam,  each  for  itself  and  in  its  season,  have 
accomplished  before  us. 

What  has  “Roman*’  law  been  for  us  hitherto?  What  has  it  spoilt?  What 
can  it  be  for  us  in  the  future? 

All  through  our  legal  history  runs,  as  basic  motive,  the  conflict  between 

^ See  Ch.  X below. 


THE  RELATIONS' BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  79 

book  and  life.  The  Western  book  is  not  an  oracle  or  magician’s  text  with  , 
Magian  undcr-sense,  but  a piece  of  preserved  Mstofy.  It  is  compressed  Past  that 
wants  to  become  Future,  through  us  who  read  it  and  in  whom  its  content  lives 
anew.  Faustian  man  does  not  aim,  like  Classical  man,  at  bringing  his  life  to  a 
self-contained  perfection,  but  at  carrying  on  a life  that  emerged  long  before 
him  and  will  draw  to  its  end  long  after  him.  For  Gothic  man  — so  far  as  he  t6- 
fleeted  about  himself  at  all  — the  question  was  not  whether  he  should  look  for 
linkages  of  his  being  and  history,  but  in  what  direction  to  look  for  them. 
He  required  a past  in  order  to  find  meaning  and  depth  in  the  present.  On  the 
spiritual  side  the  past  which  presented  itself  to  him  was  ancient  Israel;  on  the 
mundane  it  was  ancient  Rome,  whose  relics  he  saw  all  about  him.  What  was 
revered  was  revered  not  because  it  was  great,  but  because  it  was  old  and  distant. 

If  these  men  had  known  Egypt,  they  would  hardly  have  noticed  Rome,  and  the 
language  of  our  Culture  would  have  developed  differently. 

As  it  was  a Culture  of  books  and  readers,  Classical  texts  were  '’received” 
in  any  and  every  field  as  Roman  law  was  “received”  in  Germany,  and  their 
further  development  assumed  the  form  of  a slow  and  unwilling  self-emancipa- 
tion. “Reception”  of  Aristotle,  of  Euclid,  of  the  Corpus  Juris,  means  in  this 
Culture  (in  the  Magian  East  it  was  different)  discovering  a ready-made  vessel 
for  our  own  thought  a great  deal  too  soon,  with  the  result  of  making  a histori- 
cally built  kind  of  man  into  a slave  of  concepts.  The  alien  life-feeling,  of  course, 
did  not  and  could  not  enter  into  his  thought,  but  it  was  a hindrance  to  his  own 
life-feeling’s  development  of  an  unconstrained  speech  of  its  own. 

Now,  legal  thought  is  forced  to  attach  itself  to  something  tangible — . 
there  must  be  something  before  it  can  abstract  its  concepts;  it  must  have 
something  from  which  to  abstract.  And  it  was  the  misfortune  of  Western 
jurisprudence  that,  instead  of  quarrying  in  strong,  firm  custom  of  social  and 
economic  life,  it  abstracted  prematurely  and  in  a hurry  from  Latin  writings. 
The  Western  jurist  became  a philologist,  and  practical  experience  of  life  was 
replaced  by  scholarly  experience  in  the  purely  logical  separation  and  disposi- 
tion of  legal  concepts  on  self-contained  foundations. 

Owing  to  this,  we  have  been  completely  cut  off  from  touch  with  the  fact 
that  private  law  is  meant  to  represent  the  social  and  economic  existence  of  its  period. 
Neither  the  Code  Napoleon  nor  the  Prussian  Landrecht,  neither  Grotius  nor 
Mommsen,  was  definitely  conscious  of  this  fact.  Neither  in  the  training  of  the 
legal  profession  nor  in  its  literature  do  we  detect  the  slightest  inkling  of  this 
— the  genuine  — “ source”  of  valid  law. 

And  consequently  we  possess  a private  law  that  rests  on  the  shadowy 
foundations  of  the  hate  Classical  economy.  The  intense  embitterment  which,  in 
these  beginnings  of  our  Civilization’s  economy,  opposes  the  name  of  Capi- 
talism to  the  name  of  Socialism  comes  very  largely  from  the  fact  that  scholarly 
jurisprudence,  and  under  its  influence  educated  thought  generally,  have  tied 


,8o  v , ' V' , . ; THE  decline  OF  THE  WEST  ;/ 

up  such  ail-important  notions  as  person,  thing,  and  property  to  the  conditions 
and  the  dispositions  of  Classical  life.  The  book  puts  itself  between  the  facts 
and  the  perception  of  them.  The  learned  ■ — meaning  thereby  the  book-learned 
-—  weigh  up  everything  to  this  day  in  scales  that  are  essentially  Classical.  The 
man  who  is  merely  active  and  not  trained  to  judgment  feels  himself  misunder- 
stood. He  sees  the  contradiction  between  the  life  of  the  times  and  the  laws 
outlook  upon  it,  and  calls  for  the  heads  of  those  who — to  gain  their  private 
ends,  as  he  thinks — have  promoted  this  opposition. 

Again  the  question  is:  By  whom  and  for  whom  is  Western  law  made? 
The  Roman  prastor  was  a landowner,  a military  ofheer,  a man  experienced  in 
administrative  and  financial  questions;  and  it  was  just  this  experience  that 
was  held  to  qualify  him  for  the  inseparable  functions  of  expounder  and  maker 
of  the  law.  The  peregrin  prsetor  developed  his  aliens'  law  as  a law  of  com- 
mercial intercourse  adapted  to  the  Late  Classical  megalopolis  — without  plan, 
without  tendency,  out  of  the  cases  that  came  before  him  and  nothing  else. 

But  the  Faustian  will-to-duration  demands  a book,  something  valid  “for 
evermore,"  ^ a system  that  is  intended  to  provide  in  advance  for  every  possible 
case,  and  this  book,  a work  of  learning,  necessarily  called  for  a scholarly  class 
of  jurists  and  judges  — the  doctors  of  the  faculties,  the  old  German  legal  fam- 
ilies, and  the  French  ** noblesse  de  robe,'^  The  English  judges,  who  number 
hardly  over  a hundred,^  are  drawn  indeed  from  an  upper  class  of  advocates  (the 
“barristers"),  but  they  actually  rank  above  many  members  of  the  Government. 

A scholar-class  is  alien  to  the  world,  and  despises  experience  that  does  not 
originate  in  thought.  Inevitably  conflict  arises  between  the  “state  of  knowl- 
edge" as  the  scholar  will  accept  it  and  the  flowing  custom  of  practical  life. 
That  manusciipt  of  the  Pandect  of  Irnerius  became,  and  for  centuries  remained, 
the  “world"  in  which  learned  jurists  lived.  Even  in  England,  where  there  are 
no  law  faculties  (in  the  European  sense),  it  was  exclusively  the  legal  profession 
that  controlled  further  growth,  so  that  even  here  the  development  of  legal 
ideas  diverged  from  the  development  of  general  life. 

Thus  what  we  have  hitherto  called  juristic  science  is  in  fact  either  the 
philology  of  law-language,  or  the  scholarship  of  law-ideas.  It  is  now  the  only 
science  that  still  continues  to  deduce  the  meaning  of  life  from  “ eternally  valid" 
principles.  “The  German  jurisprudence  of  to-day,"  says  Sohm,^  "represents 
very  largely  indeed  an  inheritance  from  mediaeval  Scholasticism.  We  have 
not  yet  begun  to  consider  in  deep  earnest  the  bearing  of  the  basic  values  of  the 
actual  life  about  us  upon  legal  theory.  We  do  not  even  yet  know  what  these 
values  are." 

^ The  permanently  valid  element  in  English  law  is  the  constant  form  of  an  incessant  demhpmnt 
by  the  courts. 

2 If  the  higher  courts  alone  arc  meant,  the  number  is  well  below  fifty  for  England  and  Wales. 
Scots  law  is  independent  of  English  and  has  its  own  jurisprudence.  — Tr. 

® p.  170. 


; ; THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  : 8i, 

Here,  tbeii,  is  the  task  that  German  thought  of  the  future  has  to  perform. 
From  the  practical  life  of  the  present  it  has  to  develop  the  deepest  principles  of 
that  life  and  elevate  them  into  basic  law-ideas.  If  our  great  arts  lie  behind  us, 

. our  great  iurispmdence  is  yet  to  come. 

For  the  work  of  the  nineteenth  century  — however  creative  that  eentury 
believed  itself  to  be  — was  merely  preparatory.  It  freed  m from  the  hook  of 
Justinian,  hut  not  from  the  concepts.  The  ideologues  of  Roman  law  among  scholars 
no  longer  count,  but  scholarship  of  the  old  cast  remains.  It  is  another  kind  of 
jurisprudence  that  is  needed  now  to  free  us  from  the  schematism  of  these  con- 
cepts. Philological  expertness  must  give  place  to  social  and  economic. 

A glance  at  German  civil  and  penal  law  will  make  the  position  clear.  They 
are  systems  tinged  with  a chaplet  of  minor  laws^ — it  was  impossible  to  em- 
body the  material  of  these  in  the  main  law.  Conceptually,  and  therefore 
syntactically,  that  which  could  not  be  understood  in  terms  of  the  Classical 
scheme  separates  itself  from  that  which  can  be  so  understood. 

How  was  it  that  in  1900  the  theft  of  electric  power  — after  grotesque 
discussions  as  to  whether  the  matter  in  dispute  was  a corporeal  thing  ^ had 
to  be  dealt  with  under  an  ad  hoc  statute?  Why  was  it  impossible  to  work  the 
substance  of  patent  law  into  the  ensemble  of  the  law  about  things?  Why  was 
copyright  law  unable  conceptually  to  differentiate  the  intellectual  creation, 
its  communicable  form  the  manuscript,  and  the  objective  product  in  print? 
Why,  in  contradiction  with  the  law  of  things,  had  the  artistic  and  the  material 
property  in  a picture  to  be  distinguished  by  separating  acquisition  of  the 
original  from  acquisition  of  the  right  to  reproduce  it?  Why  is  the  misappro- 
priation of  a business  idea  or  a scheme  of  organisiation  unpunishable,  and  theft 
of  the  piece  of  paper  on  which  it  is  set  forth  punishable?  Because  even  to-day 
we  are  dominated  by  the  Classical  idea  of  the  material  thing.  ^ We  live  other- 
wise. Our  instinctive  experience  is  subject  to  functional  concepts,  such  as  work- 
ing power,  inventiveness,  enterprise,  such  as  intellectual  and  bodily,  artistic  and 
organizing,  energies  and  capacities  and  talents.  In  our  physics  (of  which  the 
theory,  advanced  though  it  is,  is  but  a copy  of  our  present  mode  of  life)  the 
old  idea  of  a body  has  in  principle  ceased  to  exist  — as  in  this  very  instance  of 
electrical  power.  Why  is  our  law  conceptually  helpless  in  the  presence  of  the 
great  facts  of  modern  economics?  Because  persons,  too,  are  known  to  it  only  as 
bodies,^ 

If  the  Western  jurisprudence  took  over  ancient  words,  yet  only  the  most  su- 
perficial elements  of  the  ancient  meanings  still  adhered  to  them.  The  consist- 
ency of  the  text  disclosed  only  the  logical  use  of  the  words,  not  the  life  that 
underlay  them.  No  practice  can  reawaken  the  silent  metaphysic  of  old  jural 

^ Similaf  problems  arc  now  (192.7)  arising  in  connexion  with  radio  broadcasting.  — Tf. 

^ Burgerlichs  Gesctrjm^h^  § 90. 

® As  evidenced  in  terms  of  French  law  like  anmyrm^*  raison  sociaU,*’’  **-persmne  jars'* 

— Tr. 


:8z  y y:..:T:HE  DECLm  OF  THE  WEST 

ideas.  . No,  laws  in  the  world  make  this  last  and  deepest  element  explicit,  be- 
cause— just  because  — it  is  self-evident.  In  all  of  them  the  essential  is  tacitly 
presupposed;  in  application  it  is  not  only  the  formula  but  also,  and  primarily, 
the  inexpressible^eiement  beneath  it  that  the  people  inwardly  understands  and 
can  practise.  Every  law  is,  to  the  extent  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  ex- 
aggerate, customary  law.  Let  the  statute  define  the  words;  it  is  life  that 
explains  them. 

If,  however,  a schoIarsMaw-language  of  alien  origin  and  alien  scheme  tries 
to  bind  the  native  and  proper  law,  the  ideas  remain  void  and  the  life  remains 
dumb.  Law  becomes,  not  a tool,  but  a burden,  and  actuality  marches  on,  not 
with,  but  apart  from  legal  history. 

And  thus  it  is  that  the  law-material  that  our  Civilization  needs  fits  only 
in  externals,  or  even  not  at  all,  with  the  Classical  scheme  of  the  law-books, 
and  for  the  purposes  of  our  proper  jurisprpdence  and  our  educated  thought 
generally  is  still  formless  and  therefore  unavailable. 

Are  persons  and  things,  in  the  sense  of  present-day  legislation,  Izw-concefts 
at  all?  No!  They  merely  serve  to  draw  the  ordinary  distinction,  the  zodlogi- 
cal  distinction,  so  to  say,  between  man  and  the  rest.  But  of  old  the  whole 
metaphysic  of  Classical  being  adhered  to  the  notion  of  '' persona,' ' The  dis- 
tinction between  man  and  deity,  the  essence  of  the  Polis,  of  the  hero,  of  the 
slave,  the  Cosmos  of  stuff  and  form,  the  life-ideal  of  Ataraxia,  were  the  self- 
evident  premisses,  and  these  premisses  have  for  us  completely  perished.  In 
our  thought  the  word  “property’’  is  tied  up  with  the  Classical  sfafk  definition, 
and  consequently,  in  every  application  to  the  dynamism  of  our  way  of  living 
it  falsifies.  We  leave  such  definitions  to  the  world-shy  abstract  professors 
of  ethics,  jurists,  and  philosophers  and  to  the  unintelligent  debate  of  political 
doctrinaires  — and  this  although  the  whole  undtotanding  of  the  economic  his- 
tory of  this  day  rests  upon  the  metaphysk  of  this  one  notion. 

It  must  be  emphasized  then  — and  with  all  rigour  — that  Classical  law 
was  a law  of  while  ours  is  a law  of  functions.  The  Romans  created  a 

juristic  statics;  our  task  is  juristic  dynamics.  For  us  persons  are  not  bodies, 
but  units  of  force  and  will;  and  things  are  not  bodies,  but  aims,  means,  and 
creations  of  these  units.  The  Classical  relation  between  bodies  v^as  positional, 
but  the  relation  between  forces  is  called  action.  For  a Roman  the  slave  was  a 
thing  which  produced  new  things.  A writer  like  Cicero  could  never  have 
conceived  of  “intellectual  property,”  let  alone  property  in  a practical  notion 
or  in  the  potentialities  of  talent;  for  us,  on  the  contrary,  the  organizer  or  in- 
ventor or  promoter  is  a generative  force  which  works  upon  other ^ executive^  forces,  by 
giving  direction,  aim,  and  means  to  their  action.  ^ Both  belong  to  economic  life, 
not  as  possessors  of  things,  but  as  carriers  of  energies. 

^ Note,  in  this  connexion,  the  remarkable  development  in  modem  American  indnstry  of  a pro* 
Eessional  mana^ial  class,  distinct  from  the  capitalist,  the  technician,  and  the  “worker/’  — Tr. 


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  THE  CULTURES  ^ 83 

The  future  will  be  called  upon  to  transpose  our  entire  legal  thought  into 
aiignment  with  our  higher  physics  and  mathematics.  Our  whole  social,  eco- 
nomic, and  technical  life  is  waiting  to  be  understood,  at  long  last,  in  this  wise. 
We  shall  need  a century  and  more  of  keenest  and  deepest  thought  to  arrive  at 
the  goal.  And  the  prerequisite  is  a wholly  new  kind  of  preparatory  training 
in  the  jurist.  It  demands: 

I.  An  immediate,  extended,  and  practical  experience  in  the  economic 
life  of  the  present. 

x.  An  exact  knowledge  of  the  legal  history  of  the  West,  with  constant 
comparison  of  German,  English,  and  “Roman”  development. 

3.  Knowledge  of  Classical  jurisprudence,  not  as  a model  for  principles 
of  present-day  validity,  but  as  a brilliant  example  of  how  a law  can  develop 
strong  and  pure  out  of  the  pactkal  life  of  its  time. 

Roman  law  has  ceased  to  be  our  source  for  principles  of  eternal  validity. 
But  the  relation  between  Roman  existence  and  Roman  law-ideas  gives  it  a 
renewed  value  for  us.  We  can  learn  from  it  how  we  have  to  build  wp  our  law 
out  of  OUT  experiences. 


CHAPTER  IV 


CITIES  AND  PEOPLES 

(A) 

THE  SOUL  OF  THE  CITY 


CHAPTER  IV 


CITIES  AND  PEOPLES 

(A) 

THE  SOUL  OF  THE  cm 

About  the  middle  of  the  second  millennium  before  Christ,  two  worlds  lay 
over  against  one  another  on  the  AEgean  Sea.  The  one,  darkly  groping,  big  with 
hopes,  drowsy  with  the  intoxication  of  deeds  and  sufferings,  ripening  quietly 
towards  its  future,  was  the  Mycenxan.  The  other,  gay  anff  satisfied,  snugly 
ensconced  in  the  treasures  of  an  ancient  Culture,  elegant,  light,  with  all  its 
great  problems  far  behind  it,  was  the  Minoan  of  Crete. 

We  shall  never  really  comprehend  this  phenomenon,  which  in  these  days  is 
becoming  the  centre  of  research-interest,  unless  we  appreciate  the  abyss  of 
opposition  that  separates  the  two  souls.  The  man  of  those  days  must  have 
felt  it  deeply,  but  hardly  “cognised”  it.  I see  it  before  me:  the  humility  of 
the  inhabitant  of  Tiryns  and  Mycenas  before  the  unattainable  esprit  of  life  in 
Cnossus,  the  contempt  of  the  well-bred  of  Cnossus  for  the  petty  chiefs  and  their 
followers,  and  withal  a secret  feeling  of  superiority  in  the  healthy  barbarians, 
Tike  that  of  the  German  soldier  in  the  presence  of  the  elderly  Roman  dignitary. 

How  are  we  in  a position  to  know  this?  There  are  several  such  moments  in 
which  the  men  of  two  Cultures  have  looked  into  one  another's  eyes.  We  know 
more  than  one  “Inter-Culture”  in  which  some  of  the  most  significant  tendencies 
of  the  human  soul  have  disclosed  themselves. 

As  it  was  (we  may  confidently  say)  between  Cnossus  and  Mycenas,  so  it  was 
between  the  Byzantine  court  and  the  German  chieftains  who,  like  Otto  II, 
married  into  it  — undisguised  wonder  on  the  part  of  the  knights  and  counts, 
answered  by  the  contemptuous  astonishment  of  a refined,  somewhat  pale  and 
tired  Civilization  at  that  bearish  morning  vigour  of  the  German  lands  which 
Scheffel  has  described  in 

In  Charlemagne  the  mixture  of  a primitive  human  spirituality,  on  the 
threshold  of  its  awakening,  with  a superposed  Late  intellectuality,  becomes 
manifest.  Certain  characteristics  of  his  rulership  would  lead  us  to  name  him 
the  Caliph  of  Fr ankistan,  but  on  his  other  sjde  he  is  but  the  chief  of  a Germanic 
tribe;  and  it  is  the  mingling  of  the  two  that  makes  him  symbolic.  In  the  same 
way  as  the  form  of  the  Aachen  palace-chapel  — no  longer  mosque,  not 
yet  cathedral.  The  Germanic-Western  prc-Culture  meanwhile  is  moving  on, 
but  slowly  and  underground,  for  that  sudden  illumination  which  we  most 
ineptly  call  the  Carolingian  Renaissance  is  a ray  from  Baghdad.  It  must  not  be 

1 Published  1857.  English  translation.  iSyz.  — Tr. 

■ 87 


88  THE'  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

overlooked  that  the  period  of  Charles  the  Great  is  an  episode  of  the  surface, 
ending,  as  accidentals  do  end,  v^ithont  issue.  After  jcx),  after  a new  deep  de- 
pression, there  begins  something  really  new,  something  having  the  telling 
force  of  a Destiny  and  the  depth  that  promises  duration.  But  in  800  it  was  the 
sun  of ' the  Arabian  Civilization  passing  on  from  the  world-cities  of  the  East 
to  the  countryside  of  the  West.  Even  so  the  sunshine  of  Hellenisin  had  spread 
to  the  distant  Indus. ^ 

.That  which  stands  on  the  hills  of  Tiryns  and  Myceme  is  Pfalz  and  Burg  of 
root-Germanic  type.  The  palaces  of  Crete  — which  are  not  kings’  castles, 
but  huge  cult-buildings  for  a crowd  of  priests  and  priestesses  — are  equipped 
with  megalopolitan  • — nay,  Late-Roman  — luxury.  At  the  foot  of  those  hills 
were  crowded  the  huts  of  yeoman  and  vassals,  but  in  Crete  (Goutnia,  Hagia 
Triada)  the  excavation  of  towns  and  villas  has  shown  that  the  requirements 
were  those  of  high  civilization,  and  the  building-technique  that  of  a long 
experience,  accustomed  to  catering  for  the  most  pampered  taste  in  furniture 
and  wall-decoration,  and  familiar  with  lighting,  water-circulation,  staircases, 
and  suchlike  problems.^  In  the  one,  the  plan  of  the  house  is  a strict  life- 
symbol;  in  the  other,  the  expression  of  a refined  utilitarianism.  Compare 
the  Kamares  vases  and  the  frescoes  of  smooth  stucco  with  everything  that  is 
genuinely  Mycen^an  “ they  are,  through  and  through,  the  product  of  an 
industrial  art,  clever  and  empty,  and  not  of  any  grand  and  deep  art  of  heavy, 
clumsy,  but  forceful  symbolism  like  that  which  in  Mycenae  was  ripening  to- 
wards the  geometric  style.  It  is,  in  a word,  not  a style  but  a taste.®  In  My- 
cenae was  housed  a primitive  race  which  chose  its  sites  according  to  soil-value 
and  facilities  for  defence,  whereas  the  Minoan  population  settled  in  business 
foci,  as  may  be  observed  very  clearly  in  the  case  of  Philakopi  on  Melos  which 
was  established  for  the  export  trade  in  obsidian.  A Mycena:an  palace  is  a 
promise,  a Minoan  something  that  is  ending.  But  it  was  just  the  same  in  the 
West  about  800  — the  Frankish  and  Visigothic  farms  and  manor-houses 
stretched  from  the  Loire  to  the  Ebro,  while  south  of  them  lay  the  Moorish 
castles,  villas,  and  mosques  of  Cordova  and  Granada. 

It  is  surely  no  accident  that  the  peak  of  this  Minoan  luxury  coincides  with 
the  period  of  the  great  Egyptian  revolution,  and  particularly  the  Hyksos  time 
(1780-1580  The  Egyptian  craftsmen  may  well  have  fled  in  those  days 

to  the  peaceful  islands  and  even  as  far  as  the  strongholds  of  the  mainland,  as  in 
a later  instance  the  Byzantine  scholars  fled  to  Italy.  For  it  is  axiomatic  that 
the  Minoan  Culture  is  a part  of  the  Egyptian,  and  we  should  be  able  to  realize 

^ Without  Alexander,  and  even  before  him,  for  Alexander  neither  kindled  nor  spread  that  light; 
he  did  not  lead,  but  followed  its  path  to  the  East. 

^ See  G.  GJotz's  recent  work  La  Civiluation  igimne^  1913  (English  translation,  19x7).  — Tr. 

2 This  is  now  recognized  by  art-research;  cf.  Salis,  Die  Kunst  der  Griecben  (1919),  pp.  3,  et  seq.; 
H.  Th.  Bosscr,  Alt-Kreta  (19x1),  introduction. 

^ D.  Fimmen,  Die  htetisch-myhenische  Kultur  (19x1^,  p.  xio. 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE  CITY  : .89 

this  more  fully  were  it  not  that  the  part  of  Egypt’s  art-store  which  would  have 
been  decisive  in  this  connexion  — viz. : what  was  produced  in  the  Western  Delta 

— has  perished  from  damp.  We  only  know  the  Egyptian  Culture  in  so  far  as  it 
flourished  on  the  dry  soil  of  the  south,  but  it  has  long  been  admitted  as  certain 
that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  its  evolution  lay  elsewhere. 

It  is  not  possible  to  draw  a strict  frontier  between  the  late  Minoan  and  the 
young  Mycenasan  art.  Throughout  the  Egyptian-Cretan  world  we  can  observe 
a highly  modern  fad  for  these  alien  and  primitive  things,  and  vice  versa  the 
war-band  kings  of  the  mainland  strongholds  stole  or  bought  Cretan  objets 
d'art  wherever  and  however  they  could  come  by  them,  admiring  and  imitating 

— even  as  the  style  of  the  Migrations,  once  supposed  to  be,  and  prized  as,  proto- 
German,  borrows  the  whole  of  its  form-language  from  the  East.^  They  had 
their  palaces  and  tombs  built  and  decorated  by  captive  or  invited  craftsmen. 
The  Treasure-house ’’(Tomb)  of  Atreus  in  Mycenae,  therefore,  is  exactly 
analogous  to  the  tomb  of  Theoderich  at  Ravenna. 

In  this  regard  Byzantium  itself  is  a marvel.  Here  layer  after  layer  has  to  be 
carefully  separated.  In  3x6  Constantine,  rebuilding  on  the  ruins  of  the  great 
city  destroyed  by  Septimus  Sever  us,  created  a Late  Classical  cosmopUs  of  the 
first  rank,  into  which  presently  streamed  hoary  Apoilinism  from  the  West  and 
youthful  Magism  from  the  East.  And  long  afterwards  again,  in  1096,  it  is 
a Late  Magian  cosmopolis,  confronted  in  its  last  autumn  days  with  spring  in  the 
shape  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon’s  crusaders,  whom  that  clever  royal  lady  Anna 
Comnena  ^ portrays  with  contempt.  As  the  easternmost  of  the  Classical  West, 
this  city  bewitched  the  Goths;  then,  a millennium  later,  as  the  northernmost 
of  the  Arabian  world,  it  enchanted  the  Russians.  And  the  amazing  Vasili 
Blazheny  in  Moscow  (1554),  the  herald  of  the  Russian  pre-Culture,  stands 
“between  styles,”  just  as,  two  thousand  years  before,  Solomon’s  Temple  had 
stood  between  Babylon  the  Cosmopolis  and  early  Christianity. 

II 

Primeval  man  is  a ranging  animal,  a being  whose  waking-consciousness 
restlessly  feels  its  way  through  life,  all  microcosm,  under  no  servitude  of  place 
or  home,  keen  and  anxious  in  its  senses,  ever  alert  to  drive  off  some  element  of 
hostile  Nature.  A deep  transformation  sets  in  first  with  agriculture  — for  that 
is  something  artificial^  with  which  hunter  and  shepherd  have  no  touch.  He 
who  digs  and  ploughs  is  seeking  not  to  plunder,  but  to  alter  Nature,  To  plant 
implies,  not  to  take  something,  but  to  produce  something.  But  with  this^  man 
himself  becomes  -plant  — namely,  as  peasant.  He  roots  in  the  earth  that  he 
tends,  the  soul  of  man  discovers  a soul  in  the  countryside,  and  a new  earth- 
boundness  of  being,  a new  feeling,  proiiotiaces  itself.  Hostile  Nature  becomes 

^ Dehio,  Gesch,  d.  deutsch,  Kstnst  (1919),  pp.  16,  et  seq. 

® Dieterich,  Byxa^t.  Chardktirkopfe,  pp.  136,  et  seq. 


go^:'  DECLINE..O^  THE  WEST 

the  friend;  ..  earth , becomes  Mother  Earth.  Between  sowing  and  begetting, 
harvest  and  death,  the  child  and  the  grain,  a profound  afEnity  is  set  up.  A new 
devoutness  addresses  itself  in  chthonian  cults  to  the  fruitful  earth  that  grows  up 
along  .with'  man.  And  as  completed  expression  of  this  life-feeling,  ,we  find 
everywhere  the  shap  &f  the  farmhouse,  which  in  the  disposition  of  the 

rooms  and  in  every  line  of  external  form  tells  us  about  the  blood  of  its  inhab- 
itants. Thc”  peasant*s  dwelling  is  the  great  symbol  of  settledness.  It  is  itself 
plant;  thrusts  its  roots  deep  into  its  “own**  soil.^  It  is  poprty  in  the  most 
sacred  sense  of  the  word.  The  kindly  spirits  of  hearth  and  door,  floor  and  cham- 
Vesta, Janus,  Lares  and  Penates — are  as  firmly  fixed  in  it  as  the  man  himself. 

This  is  the  condition  precedent  of  every  Culture,  which  itself  in  turn  grows 
up  out  of  a mother-landscape  and  renews  and  intensifies  the  intimacy  of  man 
and  soil.  What  his  cottage  is  to  the  peasant,  that  the  town  is  to  the  Culture- 
man,  As  each  individual  house  has  its  kindly  spirits,  so  each  town  has  its 
tutelary  god  or  saint.  The  town,  too,  is  a plantlike  being,  as  far  removed  as  a 
peasantry  is  from  nomadism  and  the  purely  microcosmic.  Hence  the  develop- 
ment of  a high  form-language  is  linked  always  to  a landscape.  Neither  an  art 
nor  a religion  can  alter  .the  site  of  its  growth;  only  in  the  Civilization  with  its 
giant  cities  do  we  come  again  to  despise  and  disengage  ourselves  from  these 
roots.  Man  as  civilized,  2ls  intellectual  nomad,  is  again  wholly  microcosmic, 
wholly  homeless,  as  free  intellectually  as  hunter  and  herdsman  were  free  sen- 
sually. “Mi  bene,  ibi  patria’  is  valid  before  as  well  as  after  a Culture.  In  the 
aot-yet-spring  of  the  Migrations  it  was  a Germanic  yearning  — virginal,  yet 
already  maternal  — that  searched  the  South  for  a home  in  which  to  nest  its 
future  Culture.  To-day,  at  the  end  of  this  Culture,  the  rootless  intelJect  ranges 
over  all  landscapes  and  all  possibilities  of  thought.  But  between  these  limits 
lies  the  time  in  which  a man  held  a bit  of  soil  to  be  something  worth  dying  for, 

. It  is  a conclusive  fact  — yet  one  hitherto  never  appreciated  — that  all 
great  Cultures  are  town-Cuitures.  Higher  man  of  the  Second  Age  is  a town- 
tied  animal.  Here  is  the  real  criterion  of  “ world-history “ that  differentiates 
it  with  utter  sharpness  from  man’s  histoiy  — world-history  is  the  history  of  civic 
man.  Peoples,  states,  politics,  religion,  all  arts,  and  ail  sciences  rest  upon  one 
prime  phenomenon  of  human  being,  the  town.  As  all  thinkers  of  all  Cultures 
themselves  live  in  the  town  (even  though  they  may  reside  bodily  in  the  coun- 
try), they  are  perfectly  unaware  of  what  a bizarre  thing  a town  is.  To  feel 
this  we  have  to  put  ourselves  unreservedly  in  the  place  of  the  wonder-struck 
primitive  who  for  the  first  time  sees  this  mass  of  stone  and  wood  set  in  the 
landscape,  with  its  stone-enclosed  streets  and  its  stone-paved  squares  — a 
domicile,  truly,  of  strange  form  and  strangely  teeming  with  men  f 

But  the  real  miracle  is  the  birth  of  the  soul  of  a town.  A mass-soul  of  a 
wholly  new  kind  — whose  last  foundations  will  remain  hidden  from  us  for 
^ Even  admitting  within  itself  the  animals  of  its  fields.  — Tr. 


9^: 


/ ^ ^THE  .SOUL  OF  THE  CITY 

ever  — suddenly  buds  off  from  the  general  spirituality  of  its  Culture.  As  soon 
as  it  is  awake,  it  forms  for  itself  a visible  body.  Out  of  the  rustic  group  of 
farms  and  cottages,  each  of  which  has  its  own  history,  arises  a totality.  And 
the  whole  lives,  breathes,  grows,  and  acquires  a face  and  an  inner  form  and 
history.  Thenceforward,  in  addition  to  the  individual  house,  the  temple, 
the  cathedral,  and  the  palace,  the  town-figure  itself  becomes  a unit  objectively 
expressing  the  form-language  and  style-history  that  accompanies  the  Culture 
throughout  its  life-course. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  what  distinguishes  a town  from  a village  is  not 
size,  but  the  presence  of  a soul.  Not  only  in  primitive  conditions,  such  as 
those  of  central  Africa,  but  in  Late  conditions  too  — China,  India,  and  in- 
dustrialized Europe  and  America  — we  find  very  large  settlements  that  are 
nevertheless  not  to  be  called  cities.  They  are  centres  of  landscape;  they  do  not 
inwardly  form  worlds  in  themselves.  They  have  no  soul.  Every  primitive 
population  lives  wholly  as  peasant  and  son  of  the  soil  — the  being  “City" 
does  not  exist  for  it.  That  which  in  externals  develops  from  the  village  is  not 
the  city,  but  the  market,  a mere  meeting-point  of  rural  life-interests.  Here 
there  can  be  no  question  of  a separate  existence.  The  inhabitant  of  a market 
may  be  a craftsman  or  a tradesman,  but  he  lives  and  thinks  as  a peasant.  We 
have  to  go  back  and  sense  accurately  what  it  means  when  out  of  a primitive 
Egyptian  or  Chinese  or  Germanic  village  — a little  spot  in  a wide  land  -—  a 
city  comes  into  being.  It  is  quite  possibly  not  differentiated  in  any  outward 
feature,  but  spiritually  it  is  a place  from  which  the  countryside  is  henceforth  re- 
garded y felty  and  experienced  as  environs y""  as  something  different  and  subordinate. 
From  now  on  there  are  two  lives,  that  of  the  inside  and  that  of  the  outside, 
and  the  peasant  understands  this  just  as  clearly  as  the  townsman.  The  village 
smith  and  the  smith  in  the  city,  the  village  headman  and  the  burgomaster,  live 
in  two  different  worlds.  The  man  of  the  land  and  the  man  of  the  city  are  dif- 
ferent essences.  First  of  all  they  feel  the  difference,  then  they  are  dominated  by 
it,  and  at  last  they  cease  to  understand  each  other  at  all.  To-day  a Branden- 
burg peasant  is  closer  to  a Sicilian  peasant  than  he  is  to  a Berliner.  From  the 
moment  of  this  specific  attunement,  the  City  comes  into  being,  and  it  is  this 
attunement  which  underlies,  as  something  that  goes  without  saying,  the  entire 
waking-consciousness  of  every  Culture. 

Every  springtime  of  a Culture  is  ipso  facto  the  springtime  of  a new  city- type 
and  civism.  The  men  of  the  pre-Culture  are  filled  with  a deep  uneasiness  in  the 
presence  of  these  types,  with  which  they  cannot  get  into  any  inward  relation. 
On  the  Rhine  and  the  Danube  the  Germans  firequently,  as  at  Strassburg,  settled 
down  at  the  gates  of  Roman  cities  that  remained  uninhabited.^  In  Crete  the 
conquerors  built,  on  the  ruins  of  the  burnt-out  cities  like  Gournia  and  Cnossus 
— villages.  The  Orders  of  the  Western  pre-Culture,  the  Benedictines,  and 
^ Dehio,  Gtsch.  d.  deutseben  Kunst  pp.  13,  et  seq. 


91.  THE 'DECLINE  OF  THE  W.EST 

particularly  the  Cluuiacs  and  Premonstratensians,  settled  like  the  knights  on 
free  land;  it  was  the  Franciscans  and  Dominicans  who  began  to  build  in  the 
Early.  Gothic  city.  There  the  new  soul  had  just  awakened.  ■ But  CYcn  there  a 
tender  melancholy  still  adheres  to  the  architecture,  as  to  Franciscan  art  as  a 
whole  — aU' almost  mystical  fear  of  the  individual  in  presence  of  the  new  and 
bright  and  conscious,  which  as  yet  was  only  dully  accepted  by  the  generality. 
Man  hardly  yet  dared  to  cease  to  be  peasant;  the  first  to  live  with  the  ripe  and 
considered  alertness  of  genuine  megalopolitans  are  the  Jesuits.  It  is  a sign  that 
the  countryside  is  still  unconditionally  supreme,  and  ioes  not  yet  recognize 
the  city,  when  the  ruler  shifts  his  court  every  spring  from  palace  to  palace. 
In  the  Egyptian  Old  Kingdom  the  thickly-populated  centre  of  the  administra- 
tion was  at  the  ‘'White  Wall’'  (Memphis),  but  the  residences  of  the  Pharaohs 
changed  incessantly  as  in  Sumerian  Babylon  and  the  CaroHngiaa  Empire. ( 
The  Early  Chinese  rulers  of  the  Ch6u  dynasty  had  their  court  as  a rule  at  Lo- 
Yang  (the  present  Ho-nan-fu)  from  about  ii6o,  but  it  was  not  until  770  — 
corresponding  to  our  sixteenth  century  — that  the  locality  was  promoted  to 
be  the  permanent  royal  residence.^ 

Never  has  the  feeling  of  earth-boundness,  of  the  plantwise-cosmic^  ex- 
pressed itself  so  powerfully  as  it  did  in  the  architecture  of  the  petty  early  towns, 
which  consisted  of  hardly  more  than  a few  streets  about  a market-place  or  a 
castle  or  a place  of  worship.  Here,  if  anywhere,  it  is  manifest  that  every  grand 
style  is  itself  plantlike.  The  Doric  column,  the  Egyptian  pyramid,  the  Gothic 
csLthtdtaly  grow  out  of  the  ground,  earnest,  big  with  destiny,  Being  without 
waking-consciousness.  The  Ionic  column,  the  buildings  of  the  Middle  King- 
dom and  those  of  the  Baroque,  calmly  aware  and  conscious  of  themselves,  free 
and  sure,  srand  on  the  ground.  There,  separated  from  the  power  of  the  land  — 
cut  off  from  it,  even,  by  the  pavement  underfoot  — Being  becomes  more  and 
more  languid,  sensation  and  reason  more  and  more  powerful.  Man  becomes 
intellect,  “free”  like  the  nomads,  whom  he  comes  to  resemble,  but  narrower 
and  colder  than  they.  “Intellect,”  **Geistf  ' *Usprit/*  is  the  specific  urban  form 
of  the  understanding  waking-consciousness.  All  art,  all  religion  and  science, 
become  slowly  intellectualized,  alien  to  the  land,  incomprehensible  to  the 
peasant  of  the  soil.  With  the  Civilization  sets  in  the  climacteric.  The  im- 
memorially  old  roots  of  Being  are  dried  up  in  the  stone-masses  of  its  cities. 
And  the  free  intellect  — fateful  word  I — appears  like  a flame,  mounts  splendid 
into  the  air,  and  pitiably  dies. 

Ill 

The  new  Soul  of  the  City  speaks  a new  language,  which  soon  comes  to  be 
tantamount  to  the  language  of  the  Culture  itself.  The  open  land  with  its 

^ Eduard  Meyer,  Gesch.  d.  Altertums,  I,  p.  188. 

2 The  English  parallel  is  Winchester.  — Tr. 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE  CITY  ^3 ^ 

vilkge-mankiod  is  wounded;  it  no  longer  understands  that  language,  it  is 
nonplussed  and  dumb.  AH  genuine  style-history  is  played  out  in  the  cities. 
It  is  exclusively  the  city’s  destiny  and  the  life-experience  of  urban  men  that 
speaks  to  the  eye  in  the  logic  of  visible  forms.  The  very  earliest  Gothic  was 
still  a growth  of  the  soil  and  laid  hold  of  the  farmhouse  with  its  inhabitants 
and  its  contents.  But  the  Renaissance  style  flourished  only  in  the  Renaissance 
d/j,  the  Baroque  only  in  the  Baroque  city  — not  to  mention  the  wholly  meg- 
alopolitan  Corinthian  column  or  Rococo.  There  was  perhaps  some  quiet 
infiltration  from  these  into  the  landscape;  but  the  land  itself  was  no  longer 
capable  of  the  smallest  creative  effort' — only  of  dumb  aversion.  The  peasant 
and  his  dwelling  remained  in  all  essentials  Gothic,  and  Gothic  it  is  to  this  day. 
The  Hellenic  countryside  preserved  the  geometric  style,  the  Egyptian  village 
the  cast  of  the  Old  Kingdom. 

It  is,  above  all,  the  expression  of  the  city’s  ‘‘visage”  that  has  a history. 
The  play  of  this  facial  expression,  indeed,  is  almost  the  spiritual  history  of  the 
Culture  Itself.  First  we  have  the  little  proto-cities  of  the  Gothic  and  other 
Early  Cultures,  which  almost  efface  themselves  in  the  landscape,  which  are 
still  genuine  peasant-houses  crowded  under  the  shadow  of  a stronghold  or  a 
sanctuary,  and  without  inward  change  become  town-houses  merely  in  the  sense 
that  they  have  neighbour-houses  instead  of  fields  and  meadows  around  them. 
The  peoples  of  the  Early  Culture  gradually  became  town-peoples,  and  accord- 
ingly there  are  not  only  specifically  Chinese,  Indian,  Apollinian,  and  Faustian 
town-forms,  but,  moreover,  Armenian  and  Syrian,  Ionian  and  Etruscan,  Ger- 
man and  French  and  English  town-physiognomies.  There  is  a city  of  Phidias, 
a city  of  Rembrandt,  a city  of  Luther.  These  designations,  and  the  mere  names 
of  Granada,  Venice,  and  Niimberg  conjure  up  at  once  quite  definite  images, 
for  all  that  the  Culture  produces  in  religion,  art,  and  knowledge  has  been 
produced  in  such  cities.  While  it  was  still  the  spirit  of  knights*  castles  and 
rural  monasteries  that  evoked  the  Crusades,  the  Reformation  is  urban  and  be- 
longs to  narrow  streets  and  steep-gabled  houses.  The  great  Epic,  which  speaks 
and  sings  of  the  blood,  belongs  to  Pfalz,  ^.nd  Burg,  but  the  Drama,  in  which 
awakened  life  tests  itseJf,  is  city-poetry,  and  the  great  Novel,  the  survey  of  all 
things  human  by  the  emancipated  intellect,  presupposes  the  world-city.  Apart 
from  really  genuine  folk-song,  the  only  lyrism  is  of  the  city.  Apart  from  the 
“ eternal* ’ peasant-art,  there  is  only  urban  painting  and  architecture,  with  a 
swift  and  soon-ended  history. 

And  these  stone  visages  that  have  incorporated  in  their  light-world  the 
humanness  of  the  citizen  himself  and,  like  him,  are  all  eye  and  intellect  — how 
distinct  the  language  of  form  that  they  talk,  how  different  from  the  rustic 
drawl  of  the  landscape ! The  silhouette  of  the  great  city,  its  roofs  and  chim- 
neys, the  towers  and  domes  on  the  horizon  I What  a language  is  imparted 
to  us  through  one  look  at  Niimberg  or  Florence,  Damascus  or  Moscow,  Peking 


94  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

or  Bcearcs.  What  do  wc  know  of  the  Classical  cities,  seeing  that  we  do  not 
know  ihc  lines  that  they  presented  uodcr  the  Southern  noon,  imdcr  clouds  in 
the  morning,  in  the  starry  night?  The  courses  of  the  streets,  straight  or  crooked, 
broad  or  narro%v;  the  houses,  low  or  tall,  bright  or  dark,  that  in  all  \\  estern 
cities  mm  their  fagadcs,  ihir  faces^  and  in  all  Eastern  cities  turn  chetr  backs, 
blank  wall  and  railing,  towards  the  street;  the  spirit  of  stparcs  and  corners, 
impasses  and  prospects,  fountains  and  monoments,  churches  or  temples  or 
mosques,  amphitheatres  and  railway  stations,  bazaars  and  town-halls!  The 
suburbs,  too,  of  neat  garden-viiks  or  of  jumbled  blocks  of  flats,  rubbish-heaps 
and  allotments;  the  fashionable  quarter  and  the  slum  area,  the  Subiira  of 
Classical  Rome  and  the  Faubourg  Saint-Germain  of  Paris,  ancient  Bai;e  and 
modern  Nice,  the  little  town-picture,  like  Bruges  and  Rothcoburg  and  the  .sca 
of  houses  like  Babylon,  Tenochtitlao,  Rome,  and  London!  All  this  has  his- 
tory and  is  history.  One  major  political  e^ent  ^ — and  the  visage  of  the  town 
falls  into  different  folds.  Napoleon  gave  to  Bourbon  Paris,  Bismarck  gave  to 
worthy  little  Berlin,  a new  mien.  But  the  Country  stands  by,  ueiiallucnccd, 
suspicious  and  irritated. 

In  the  earliest  time  the  lamiscapi-figme  dam  dominates  man's  eyes.  It  gives 
form  to  his.  soul  and  ..vibrates  in  tune  therewith.  Feelings  and  woodland  rus- 
tlings beat  together;  the  ine.adows  and  the  copses  adapt  themselves  to  its  shafse, 
to  its  course,  even  to  its  dress.  The  village,  with  its  quiet  hillocky  roofs,  its 
evening  smoke,  its  wells,  its  .hedges,  and  its  beasts,  lies  completely  fu»d  and 
embedded  in  the  la.ndscaf«.  The  cou.otry  town  cmfirms  the  country,  is  an  in- 
tensification of  the  picture  of  the  country. . It  is  the  Late  city  that  first  defies 
the  land,  contradicts  Nature  in  the  lines  of  its  silhouette,  denks  all  Nature. 
It  wants  to  be  something  d.i.ffcrent  from  and  higher  than  Nature.  These  high- 
pitched  gabies,  these  Baroque  cupolas,  spires,  and  pinnacles,  neither  arc,  nor 
desire  to  be,  related  with  anything  in  Nature.  And  then  begins  the  gigantic 
megalopolis,  the  ctj-as-marld,  which  suffers  nothing  beside  itself  and  sets 
about  mnihilatirng  the  country  picture.  The  town  that  once  upon  a time  himbly 
accommodated  itself  to  that  picture  now  insists  that  it  shall  be  the  same  as 
itself.  Extra  mmas^  chauss6cs  and  woods  and  pastures  become  a park,  moun- 
tains become  tourists'  view-points;  and  intra  m»r&s  arises  an  imitation  Nature, 
fountains  in  lieu  of  springs,  flower-beds,  formal  pools,  and  dipped  hedges  in 
lieu  of  meadows  and  ponds  and  bushes.  In  a village  the  thatched  roof  is  still 
hili-like  and  the  street  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  baulk  of  earth  fcetween  fields. 
But  here  the  picture  is  of  deep,  long  gorges  between  high,  stony  houses  filled 
with  coloured  dust  and  strange  uproar,  and  men  dwell  in  these  houses,  the  like 
of  which  no  nature-being  has  ever  conceived.  Costumes,  even  faces,  arc  ad- 
justed to  a background  of  stone.  By  day  there  is  a street  traffic  of  strange  col- 
ours and  tones,  and  by  night  a new  light  that  outshines  the  moon.  And  the 
yokel  stands  helpless  on  the  pavement,  understanding  nothing  and  understood 


^ THE  SOUL  OF  THE  CITY  .■  „ ,.95 

by  nobody,  tolerated  as  a useful  type  in  farce  and  provider  of  this  world’s 
daily  bread. 

It  follows,  however  — and  this  is  the  most  essential  point  of  any  — that 
we  cannot  comprehend  political  and  economic  history  at  all  unless  w^c  realize 
that  the  city,  with  its  gradual  detachment  from  and  final  bankrupting  of  the 
country,  is  the  determinative  form  to  which  the  course  and  sense  9f  higher 
history  generally  conforms,  Wwld  his$0ty  is  city  hist§fy. 

An  obvious  ease  in  point  is,  of  course,  the  Classical  world,  in  which  thi 
Euclidean  feeling  of  existence  connected  the  cityddea  with  its  need  of  mini- 
mizing extension  and  thus,  with  cverTncrcasing  emphasis,  identified  the  State 
with  the  stone  body  of  the  individual  Polls.  But,  quite  apart  from  this  instance, 
w^c  find  in  every  Culture  (and  very  soon)  the  tyf«  of  the  capital  city.  This,  as  its 
name  fX)intcdly  indicates,  is  that  city  whose  spirit,  with  its  methods,  aims,  and 
decisions  of  policy  and  economics,  dominates  the  land.  The  land  with  its 
people  is  for  this  controlling  spirit  a tool  and  an  object.  The  land  does  not 
tindcrstand  what  is  going  on,  and  is  not  even  asked.  In  all  countries  of  all  Late 
Cultures,  the  great  parties,  the,  revolutions,  the  Cxsarisms,  the  democracies, 
the  parliaments,  arc  the  form  in  which  the  spirit  of  the  capital  tells  the  country 
what  it  is  expected  to  desire  and,  if  called  upon,  to  die  for.  The  Classical  forum, 
the  Western  press,  arc,  essentially,  ■ intellectual  engines  of  the , ruling  City, 
Any  coun try-dweller  who  really  understands  the  meaning  of  politics  in  such 
periods,  and  feels  himself  on  their  level,  moves  into  the  City,  not  perhaps  in 
the  body,  but  certainly  in  the  spirit.^  The  sentiment  and  public  opinion  of  the 
peasant’s  country-side  — so  far  as  it  can  be  said  to  exist^  — is  prescribed  and 
guided  by  the  print  and  speech  of  the  city.  Egypt  is  Thebes,  the  $rbis  terramm 
is  Rome,  Islam  is  Baghdad,  France  is  Paris.  The  history  of  every  springtime 
phase  is  played  out  in  the  many  small  centres  of  many  separate  districts.  The 
Egyptian  nomes,  the  Greek  peoples  of  Homer,  the  Gothic  counties  and 
free  cities,  were  the  makers  of  history  of  old.  But  gradually  Policy  gathers 
itself  up  into  a very  few  capitals,  and  everything  else  retains  but  a shadow  of 
political  existence.  Even  in  the  Classical  world,  the  atomizing  tendency 
towards  city-states  did  not  hold  out  against  the  major  movement.  As  early 
as  the  Peloponnesian  War  it  was  only  Athens  and  Sparta  that  were  really 
handling  policy,  the  remaining  cities  of  the  iEgcan  being  merely  elements 
within  the  hegemony  of  the  one  or  the  other;  of  policies  of  tkir  cum  there  is  no 

^ The  phenomenon  is  perhaps  too  well  known  in  onr  cia)^  to  need  exemplification.  Bnt  it  is 
worth  while  recalling  that  the  nsaal  form  of  disgrace  fix:  a minister  or  courtier  of  the  seventeenth 
or  eightemth  centnrj  was  to  he  commanded  m **  retire  to  his  estates/'  and  that  a student  expelled 
from  the  nnivorsitics  is  said  to  be  **  msticamd/'  Since  this  volume  was  written,  a rcmarkahle  proof 
of  the  reality  of  this  spkitual  indrawing  by  the  Megalopolis  has  been  given  by  the  swift  spread  of 
radio  broadcasting  over  the  Wcst-Europcan  and  Amarican  world.  For  the  country-dweller,  radio 
raxpeiem  means  intimate  touch  with  the  news,  the  thought,  and  the  entertainment  of  the  great 
city,  and  relieves  the  grfrww#  of  **  isolation'*  that  the  older  countryfolk  would  never  have  fdt 
as  a grievance  at  all.  — Tf. 


96  : ■ . : — TB-E  DECLINE'  OF  THE  WEST 

longer  any  question.  Finally  it  is  the  Forum  of  the  City  of  Rome  alone  that  is 
the  scene  of  Classical  history,  Cassar  might  campaign  in  Ganlj  his  slayers  in 
Macedonia,  Antony  in  Egypt,  but,  whatever  happened  in  these  fields,  it. was 
from  their  relation  to  ^ome  that  events  acquired  meaning, 

lY  ■ 

All  effectual  history  begins  with  the  primary  classes,  nobility  and  priest- 
hood, forming  themselves  and  elevating  themselves  above  the  peasantry  as 
such.  The  opposition  of  greater  and  lesser  nobility,  between  king  and  vassal, 
between  worldly  and  spiritual  power,  is  the  basic  form  of  all  primitive  politics, 
Homeric,  Chinese,  or  Gothic,  until  with  thecoming  of  theCity,  the  burgher,  the 
Tiers  Mtat,  history  changes  its  style.  But  it  is  exclusively  in  these  classes  as 
such,  in  their  class-consciousness,  that  the  whole  meaning  of  history  inheres. 
The  peasant  is  historyless.  The  village  stands  outside  world-history,  and  all 
evolution  from  the  “Trojan’'  to  the  Mithridatic  War,  from  the  Saxon  emperors 
to  the  World  War  of  1914,  passes  by  these  little  points  on  the  landscape,  occa- 
sionally destroying  them  and  wasting  their  blood,  but  never  in  the  least  touch- 
ing their  inwardness.  A 

The  peasant  is  the  eternal  man,  independent  of  every  Culture  that  ensconces 
itself  in  the  cities.  He  precedes  it,  he  outlives  it,  a dumb  creature  propagating 
himself  from  generation  to  generation,  limited  to  soil-bound  callings  and 
aptitudes,  a mystical  soul,  a dry,  shrewd  understanding  that  sticks  to  practical 
matters,  the  origin  and  the  ever-flowing  source  of  the  blood  that  makes  world- 
history  in  the  cities. 

Whatever  the  Culture  up  there  in  the  city  conceives  in  the  way  of  state- 
forms,  economic  customs,  articles  of  faith,  implements,  knowledge,  art,  he 
receives  mistrustfully  and  hesitatingly;  though  in  the  end  he  may  accept  these 
things,  never  is  he  altered  in  kind  thereby.  Thus  the  West-European  peasant 
outwardly  took  in  all  the  dogmas  of  the  Councils  from  the  great  Lateran  to 
that  of  Trent,  just  as  he  took  in  the  products  of  mechanical  engineering  and 
those  of  the  French  Revolution  — but  he  remains  what  he  was,  what  he  already 
was  in  Charlemagne’s  day.  The  present-day  piety  of  the  peasant  is  older  than 
Christianity;  his  gods  are  more  ancient  than  those  of  any  higher  religion. 
Remove  from  him  the  pressure  of  the  great  cities  and  he  will  revert  to  the  state 
of  nature  without  feeling  that  he  is  losing  anything.  His  real  ethic,  his  real 
metaphysic,  which  no  scholar  of  the  city  has  yet  thought  it  worth  while  to 
discover,  lie  outside  all  religious  and  spiritual  history,  have  in  fact  no  history 
at  all. 

The  city  is  intellect.  The  Megalopolis  is  “ free’ * intellect.  It  is  in  resistance 
to  the  “feudal”  powers  of  blood  and  tradition  that  the  burgherdom  or  bour- 
geoisie, the  intellectual  class,  begins  to  be  conscious  of  its  own  separate  exist- 
ence. It  upsets  thrones  and  limits  old  rights  in  the  name  of  reason  and  above  all 


THE'  SOUL' OF  THE  CITY  ' 97 

in  the  naine  of  “the  People,**  which  henceforward  means  exclusively  the  people 
of  the  city.  Democracy  is  the  political  form  in  which  the  townsman’s  outlook 
upon  the  world  is  demanded  of  the  peasantry  also.  The  urban  intellect  reforms 
the  great  religion  of  the  springtime  and  sets  up  by  the  side  of  the  old  religion 
of  noble  and  priest,  the  new  religion  of  the  Tiers  Etat,  liberal  science.  The  city 
assumes  the  lead  and  control  of  economic  history  in  replacing  the  primitive 
values  of  the  land,  which  are  for  ever  inseparable  from  the  life  and  thought  of 
the  rustic,  by  the  absolute  idea  of  money  as  distinct  from  goods.  The  immemorial 
country  word  for  exchange  of  goods  is  “ barter*  * ; even  when  one  of  the  things 
exchanged  is  precious  metal,  the  underlying  idea  of  the  process  is  not  yet 
monetary  — i.e.,  it  does  not  involve  the  abstraction  of  value  from  things  and  its 
fixation  in  metallic  or  fictitious  quantities  intended  to  measure  things  qua 
“commodities.**  Caravan  expeditions  and  Viking  voyages  in  the  springtime  are 
made  between  land-settlements  and  imply  barter  or  booty,  whereas  in  the  Late 
period  they  are  made  between  cities  and  mean  “money.”  This  is  the  distinction 
between  the  Normans  before  and  the  Hansa  and  Venetians  after  the  Crusades,^ 
and  between  the  seafarers  of  Mycenaean  times  and  those  of  the  later  colonisation 
period  in  Greece.  The  City  means  not  only  intellect,  but  also  money.^ 

Presently  there  arrived  an  epoch  when  the  development  of  the  city  had 
reached  such  a point  of  power  that  it  had  no  longer  to  defend  itself  against 
country  and  chivalry,  but  on  the  contrary  had  become  a despotism  against  which 
the  land  and  its  basic  orders  of  society  were  fighting  a hopeless  defensive  battle 
—■  in  the  spiritual  domain  against  nationalism,  in  the  political  against 
democracy,  in  the  economic  against  money.  At  this  period  the  number  of  cities 
that  really  counted  as  historically  dominant  had  already  become  very  small. 
And  with  this  there  arose  the  profound  distinction  — which  was  above  all  a 
spiritual  distinction  — between  the  great  city  and  the  little  city  or  town. 
The  latter,  very  significantly  called  the  country-town,  was  a part  of  the  no 
longer  co-efficient  countryside.  It  was  not  that  the  difference  between  towns- 
man and  rustic  had  become  lessened  in  such  towns,  but  that  this  difference 
had  become  negligible  as  compared  with  the  new  difference  between  them  and 
the  great  city.  The  sly-shrewdness  of  the  country  and  the  intelligence  of  the 
megalopolis  are  two  forms  of  waking-consciousness  between  which  reciprocal 
understanding  is  scarcely  possible.  Here  again  it  is  evident  that  what  counts 
is  not  the  number  of  inhabitants,  but  the  spirit.  It  is  evident,  moreover,  that 
in  all  great  cities  nooks  remained  in  which  relics  of  an  almost  rural  mankind 
lived  in  their  byeways  much  as  if  they  were  on  the  land,  and  the  people  on  the 
two  sides  of  the  street  were  almost  in  the  relation  of  two  villages.  In  fact,  a 

^ In  the  case  of  the  Venetians  the  money-outlook  was  already  potent  during  the  earlier  Crusades. 
But  the  fact  that  their  financial  exploitation  of  the  great  religious  adventure  was  regarded  as  scan- 
dalous indicates  sufSciently  that  the  rural  world  of  the  West  was  not  yet  face  to  face  with  the  money- 
idea.  — Tr. 

2 Sec  Ch.  XIII  below. 


98  ..,THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

pyramid  of  mouatiiig^^^d^  of  decreasing  number  and  increasing  field  of 
view,  leads  up  from  such  quasi-rural  elements,  in  ever-narrowing  layers,  to  the 
small  number  of  genuine  megalopolitans  at  the  top,  who  are  at  home  wherever 
their  spiritual  postulates  are  satisfied. 

With  this  the  notion  of  money  attains  to  full  abstractness.  It  no  longer 
merely  serves  £ot  the  understanding  of  economic  intercourse,  but  subjects  the 
exchange  of  goods  to  its  own  evolution.  It  values  things,  no  longer  as  between 
each  other,  but  with  reference  to  itself , Its  relation  to  the  soil  and  to  the  man  of 
the  soil  has  so  completely  vanished,  that  in  the  economic  thought  of  the  lead- 
ing cities  — the  “money-markets’"  — it  is  ignored.  Money  has  now  become 
a power,  and,  moreover,  a power  that  is  wholly  intellectual  and  merely  figured 
in  the  metal  it  uses,  a power  the  reality  of  which  resides  in  the  waking-con- 
sciousness of  the  Upper  stratum  of  an  economically  active  population,  a power 
that  makes  those  concerned  with  it  just  as  dependent  upon  itself  as  the  peasant 
was  dependent  upon  the  soil.  There  is  monetary  thought,  just  as  there  is 
mathematical  or  juristic. 

But  the  earth  is  actual  and  natural,  and  money  is  abstract  and  artificial,  a 
mere  “category”  — like  “ virtue”  in  the  imagination  of  the  Age  of  Enlighten- 
ment. And  therefore  every  primary,  pre-civic  economy  is  dependent  upon  and 
held  in  bondage  by  the  cosmic  powers,  the  soil,  the  climate,  the  type  of  man, 
whereas  money,  as  the  pure  form  of  economic  intercourse  within  the  waking- 
cdnsciousness,  is  no  more  limited  in  potential  scope  by  actuality  than  are  the 
quantities  of  the  mathematical  and  the  logical  world.  Just  as  no  view  of  facts 
hinders  us  from  constructing  as  many  non-Euclidean  geometries  as  we  please,  so 
in  the  developed  megalopolitan  economics  there  is  no  longer  any  inherent 
objection  to  increasing  “money”  or  to  thinking,  so  to  say,  in  other  money- 
dimensions.  This  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  availability  of  gold  or  with  any 
values  in  actuality  at  all.  There  is  no  standard  and  no  sort  of  goods  in  which 
the  value  of  the  talent  in  the  Persian  Wars  can  be  compared  with  its  value  in 
the  Egyptian  booty  of  Pompey.  Money  has  become,  for  man  as  an  economic 
animal,  a form  of  the  activity  of  waking-consciousness,  having  no  longer  any 
roots  in  Being.  This  is  the  basis  of  its  monstrous  power  over  every  beginning 
Civilization,  which  is  always  an  unconditional  dictatorship  of  money,  though 
taking  different  forms  in  different  Cultures.  But  this  is  the  reason,  too,  for  the 
want  of  solidity,  which  eventually  leads  to  its  losing  its  power  and  its  meaning, 
so  that  at  the  last,  as  in  Diocletian's  time,  it  disappears  from  the  thought  of  the 
closing  Civilization,  and  the  primary  values  of  the  soil  return  anew  to  take  its 
place. 

Finally,  there  arises  the  monstrous  symbol  and  vessel  of  the  completely 
emancipated  intellect,  the  world-city,  the  centre  in  which  the  course  of  a world- 
history  ends  by  winding  itself  up.  A handful  of  gigantic  places  in  each  Civili- 
zation  disfranchises  and  disvalues  the  entire  motherland  of  its  own  Culture 


' ■ ■■"  THE  SOUL.  OF  TH-E' CITY  99, 

under  the  coEtempmous  name  of  ’‘the  provinces.”  The  ‘‘provinces”  are  now 
everything  whatsoever land,  town,  and  city  — except  these  two  or  three 
points.  There  arc  no  longer  noblesse  and  bourgeoisie,  freemen  and  slaves,  Hel- 
lenes and  Barbarians,  believers  and  unbelievers,  but  only  cosmopolitans  and 
pimials.  Ail  other  contrasts  pale  before  this  one,  which  dominates  all  events, 
all  habits  of  life,  all  views  of  the  world. 

The  earliest  of  all  world-cities  were  Babylon  and  the  Thebes  of  the  New 
Empire  — the  Minoan  world  of  Crete,  for  all  its  splendour,  belonged  to  the 
Egyptian  “provinces.”  In  the  Classical  the  first  example  is  Alexandria,  which 
reduced  old  Greece  at  one  stroke  to  the  provincial  level,  and  which  even  Rome, 
even  the  resettled  Carthage,  even  Byzantium,  could  not  suppress.  In  India  the 
giant  cities  of  Ujjaina,  Kanauj,  and  above  all  Pataliputra  were  renowned  even 
in  China  and  Java,  and  everyone  knows  the  fairy-tale  reputation  of  Baghdad  and 
Granada  in  the  West.  In  the  Mexican  world,  it  seems,  Uxmal  (founded  in  950) 
was  the  first  world-city  of  the  Maya  realms,  which,  however,  with  the  rise 
of  the  Toltec  world-cities  Tezcuco  and  Tenochtitlan  sank  to  the  level  of  the 
provinces. 

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  word  “province”  first  appears  as  a 
constitutional  designation  given  by  the  Romans  to  Sicily;  the  subjugation  of 
Sicily,  in  fact,  is  the  first  example  of  a once  pre-eminent  Culture-landscape 
sinking  so  far  as  to  be  purely  and  simply  an  object.  Syracuse,  the  first  real 
great-city  of  the  Classical  world,  had  flourished  when  Rome  was  still  an  un- 
important country  town,  but  thenceforward,  vis-'k-vis  Rome,  it  becomes  a 
provincial  city.  In  just  the  same  way  Habsburg  Madrid  and  Papal  Rome, 
leading  cities  in  the  Europe  of  the  seventeenth  century,  were  from  the  outset 
of  the  eighteenth  depressed  to  the  provincial  level  by  the  world-cities  of  Paris 
and  London.  And  the  rise  of  New  York  to  the  position  of  world-city  during 
the  Civil  War  of  1861-5  may  perhaps  prove  to  have  been  the  most  pregnant 
event  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

V , 

The  stone  Colossus  “Cosmopolis**  stands  at  the  end  of  the  life’s  course  of 
every  great  Culture.  The  Culture-man  whom  the  land  has  spiritually  formed 
is  seized  and  possessed  by  his  own  creation,  the  City,  and  is  made  into  its  crea- 
ture, its  executive  organ,  and  finally  its  victim.  This  stony  mass  is  the  absolute 
city.  Its  image,  as  it  appears  with  all  its  grandiose  beauty  in  the  light-world 
of  the  human  eye,  contains  the  whole  noble  death-symbolism  of  the  definitive 
thing-become.  The  spirit-pervaded  stone  of  Gothic  buildings,  after  a millen- 
nium of  "style-evolution,  has  become  the  soulless  material  of  this  daemonic 
stone-desert. 

These  final  cities  are  wholly  intellect.  Their  houses  are  no  longer,  as  those 
of  the  Ionic  and  the  Baroque  were,  derivatives  of  the  old  peasant’s  house, 


lOO 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

whence,  the;  Culture  took  its  spring  into  history.  They  are,,  generally  sp:aking, 
no  longer  houses  in  which  Vesta  and  Janus,  Lares  and  Penates,  have  any  sort  of 
footing,  but  mere  premises  which  have  been  fashioned,  not  by  blood  but  by 
requirements,  not  by  feeling  but  by  the  spirit  of  commercial  enterprise.  So 
long  as  the  hearth  has  a pious  meaning  as  the  actual  and  genuine  centre  of  a 
family,  the  old  relation  to  the  land  is  not  wholly  extinct.  But  when  too, 
follows  the  rest  into  oblivion,  and  the  mass  of  tenants  and  bed-occupiers  in  the 
sea  of  houses  leads  a vagrant  existence  from  shelter  to  shelter  like  the  hunters 
and  pastors  of  the  “pre-*’  time,  then  the  intellectual  nomad  is  completely 
developed.  This  city  is  a world,  is  the  world.  Only  as  a whole,  as  a human 
dwelling-place,  has  it  meaning,  the  houses  being  merely  the  stones  of  which 
it  is  assembled. 

Now  the  old  mature  cities  with  their  Gothic  nucleus  of  cathedral,  town- 
halls,  and  high-gabled  streets,  with  their  old  walls,  towers,  and  gates,  ringed 
about  by  the  Baroque  growth  of  brighter  and  more  elegant  patricians*  houses, 
palaces,  and  hall-churches,  begin  to  overflow  in  all  directions  in  formless 
masses,  to  eat  into  the  decaying  country-side  with  their  multiplied  barrack- 
tenements  and  utility  buildings,  and  to  destroy  the  noble  aspect  of  the  old 
time  by  clearances  and  rebuildings.  Looking  down  from  one  of  the  old  tow- 
ers upon  the  sea  of  houses,  we  perceive  in  this  petrification  of  a historic  being 
the  exact  epoch  that  marks  the  end  of  organic  growth  and  the  beginning  of  an 
inorganic  and  therefore  unrestrained  process  of  massing  without  limit.  And 
now,  too,  appears  that  artificial,  mathematical,  utterly  land-alien  product  of  a 
pure  intellectual  satisfaction  in  the  appropriate,  the  city  of  the  city-architect. 
In  all  Civilizations  alike,  these  cities  aim  at  the  chessboard  form,  which  is  the 
symbol  of  soullessness.  Regular  rectangle-blocks  astounded  Herodotus  in 
Babylon  and  Cortez  in  Tenochtitlan.  In  the  Classical  world  the  series  of 
abstract**  cities  begins  with  Thurii,  which  was  planned**  by  Hippodamus 
of  Miletus  in  441.  Pricne,  whose  chessboard  scheme  entirely  ignores  the  ups 
and  downs  of  the  site,  Rhodes,  and  Alexandria  follow,  and  become  in  turn 
models  for  innumerable  provincial  cities  of  the  Imperial  Age.  The  Islamic 
architects  laid  out  Baghdad  from  yfiz,  and  the  giant  city  of  Samarra  a century 
later,  according  to  plan.^  In  the  West-European  and  American  world  the 
lay-out  of  Washington  in  1791  is  the  first  big  example.^  There  can  be  no  doubt 

^ Samarra  exhibits,  iike  the  Imperial  Fora  of  Rome  and  the  mins  of  Luxor,  truly  American 
proportions.  The  city  stretches  for  33  km.  [xo  miles]  along  the  Tigris.  The  Balkuwara  Palace, 
which  the  Caliph  Mutawakil  built  for  one  of  his  sons,  forms  a square  of  1x50  m.  [say,  three-quarters 
of  a mile]  on  each  side.  One  of  the  giant  mosques  measures  in  plan  x6o  X 180  m.  [858  X 594  ft.]. 
Schwarz,  Die  Ahbasidenresidmz,  Samarra  (1910),*  Hcr2fcld,  Asisgrabungen  von  Samarra  (191X).  Pata- 
liputra,  in  the  days  of  Chandragupta  and  Asoka,  measured  intra  muros  10  miles  x x mil&  (equal  to 
Manhattan  Island  or  London  along  the  Thames  from  Greenwich  to  Richmond.  — Tr. 

^ Karlsruhe,  with  its  fan-scheme,  and  Mannheim,  with  its  rectangles,  arc  earlier  than  Wash- 
ington. But  both  arc  small  places.  The  one  is  a sort  of  extension  of  the  prince’s  Rococo  park  and 
centred  on  his  pint  de  vue;  the  other,  though  its  block-numbering,  unique  in  Europe,  seems  to 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE  CITY  loi 

that  the  world-cities  of  the  Han  period  in  China  and  the  Mantya  dynasty  in 
India  possessed  this  same  geometrical  pattern.  Even  now  the  world-cities  of  the 
Western  Civilization  arc  fat  from  having  reached  the  peak  of  their  development. 
I see,  long  after  a.b.  xooo,  cities  laid  out  for  ten  to  twenty  million  inhabitants, 
spread  over  enormous  areas  of  country-side,  with  buildings  that  will  dwarf  the 
biggest  of  to-day’s  and  notions  of  traffic  and  communication  that  we  should 
regard  as  fantastic  to  the  point  of  madness.^ 

Even  in  this  final  shape  of  his  being,  the  Classical  man’s  form-ideal  remains 
the  corporeal  point.  Whereas  the  giant  cities  of  our  present  confess  our  ir- 
resistible tendency  towards  the  infinite  — our  suburbs  and  garden  cities, 
invading  the  wide  country-side,  our  vast  and  comprehensive  network  of 
roads,  and  within  the  thickly  built  areas  a controlled  fast  traffic  on,  below, 
and  above  straight,  broad  streets  — th6  genuine  Classical  world-city  ever 
strove,  not  to  expand,  but  to  thicken  — the  streets  narrow  and  cramped, 
impossible  for  fast  traffic  (although  this  was  fully  developed  on  the  great 
Roman  roads),  entire  unwillingness  to  live  in  suburbs  or  even  to  make  suburbs 
possible.^  Even  at  that  stage  the  city  must  needs  be  a body,  thick  and  round, 
(TcbfjLa  in  the  strictest  sense.  The  synoecism  that  in  the  early  Classical  had 
gradually  drawn  the  land-folk  into  the  cities,  and  so  created  the  type  of  the 
Polis,  repeated  itself  at  the  last  in  absurd  form;  everyone  wanted  to  live  in 
the  middle  of  the  city,  in  its  densest  nucleus,  for  otherwise  he  could  not  feel 
himself  to  be  the  urban  man  that  he  was.  All  these  cities  are  only  cites,  inner 
towns.  The  new  synoecism  formed,  instead  of  suburban  zones,  the  world  of  the 
upper  floors.  In  the  year  74  Rome,  in  spite  of  its  immense  population,  had  the 
ridiculously  small  perimeter  of  nineteen  and  a half  kilometres  [twelve  miles].® 
Consequently  these  city-bodies  extended  in  general  not  in  breadth,  but  more 
and  more  upward.  The  block-tenements  of  Rome  such  as  the  famous  Insula 
Feliculae,  rose,  with  a street  breadth  of  only  three  to  five  metres  [ten  to  seven- 
teen feet]  ^ to  heights  that  have  never  been  seen  in  Western  Europe  and  are 

relate  it  to  the  American  city,  was  really  planned  as  a self-contained  military  capital,  rectangular 
only  within  its  oval  enceinte,  whereas  the  American  rectangles  are  meant  to  be  added  to.  The  lay- 
out of  Petersburg  by  Peter  the  Great  (which  has  been  adhered  to  to  this  day  and  is  still  incompletely 
filled  in  in  detail)  is  a much  more  forcible  example  of  the  arbitrary  planning  of  a megalopolis. 
Though  outside  the  “European”  world,  it  is  of  it,  for  it  was  the  visible  symbol  of  Peter’s  will  to 
force  Europe  upon  Russia.  It  is  contemporary  with  Mannheim  and  Karlsruhe  (early  eighteenth 
century),  but  its  creator  conceived  of  it  as  a city  of  the  future.  — Tr. 

^ In  the  case  of  Canada,  not  merely  great  regions,  but  the  whole  country  has  been  picketed  out  in 
equal  rectangles  for  future  development.  — Tf. 

2 It  has  been  left  to  the  Western  Civilization  of  present-day  Rome  to  build  the  garden  suburbs 
that  the  Classical  Civilization  could  have  built.  — TV. 

® Friedlander,  Sittengeschichte  Roms,  I,  p.  5.  Compare  this  with  Samarra,  which  had  nothing 
like  this  population.  The  “Late  Classical  city  on  Arabian  soil  was  un-Classical  in  this  respect 
as  in  others.  The  garden  suburb  of  Antioch  was  renowned  throughout  the  East.’*’ 

^ The  city  which  the  Egyptian  “Julian  the  Apostate,”  Amenophis  IV  (Akhenaton)  built  himself 
in  Teil-el-Amarna  had  streets  up  to  45  m.  [149  ft.]  wide. 


102. 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

seea  in  only  a few  cities  in  Ameri^^  Near  the  Capitol,  the  roofs  already 
reached  to  the  level  of  the  hill-saddle.^  But  always  the  splendid  mass-cities 
harbour  lamentable  poverty  and  degraded  habits,  and  the  attics  and  man- 
sards, the  cellars  and  back  courts  are  breeding  a new  type  of  raw  man  — in 
Baghdad  and  in  Babylon,  just  as  in  Tenochtitlan  and  to-day  in  London  and 
Berlin.  Diodorus  tells  of  a deposed  Eg3rptian  king  who  was  reduced  to  living 
in  one  of  these  wretched  upper-floor  tenements  of  Rome. 

But  no  wretchedness,  no  compulsion,  not  even  a clear  vision  of  the  mad- 
ness of  this  development,  avails  to  neutralize  the  attractive  force  of  these 
dasmonic  creations.  The  wheel  of  Destiny  rolls  on  to  its  end;  the  birth  of  the 
City  entails  its  death.  Beginning  and  end,  a peasant  cottage  and  a tenement- 
block  are  related  to  one  another  as  soul  and  intellect,  as  blood  and  stone. 
But  ** Time’*  is  no  abstract  phrase,  but  a name  for  the  actuality  of  Irreversi- 
bility. Here  there  is  only  forward,  never  back.  Long,  long  ago  the  country 
bore  the  country- town  and  nourished  it  with  her  best  blood.  Now  the  giant 
city  sucks  the  country  dry,  insatiably  and  incessantly  demanding  and  devouring 
fresh  streams  of  men,  till  it  wearies  and  dies  in  the  midst  of  an  almost  unin- 
habited waste  of  country.  Once  the  full  sinful  beauty  of  this  last  marvel  of  all 
history  has  captured  a victim,  it  never  lets  him  go.  Primitive  folk  can  loose 
themselves  from  the  soil  and  wander,  but  the  intellectual  nomad  never.  Home- 
sickness for  the  great  city  is  keener  than  any , other  nostalgia.  Home  is  for 
him  any  one  of  these  giant  cities,  but  even  the  nearest  village  is  alien  territory. 
He  would  sooner  die  upon  the  pavement  than  go  “back”  to  the  land.  Even 
disgust  at  this  pretentiousness,  weariness  of  the  thousand-hued  glitter,  the 
taedium  vit^  that  in  the  end  overcomes  many,  does  not  set  them  free.  They  take 
the  City  with  them  into  the  mountains  or  on  the  sea.  They  have  lost  the 
country  within  themselves  and  will  never  regain  it  outside. 

What  makes  the  man  of  the  world-cities  incapable  of  living  on  any  but 
this  artificial  footing  is  that  the  cosmic  beat  in  his  being  is  ever  decreasing,  while 
the  tensions  of  his  waking-consciousness  become  more  and  more  dangerous. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  in  a microcosm  the  animal,  waking  side  suf^r- 
venes  upon  the  vegetable  side,  that  of  being,  and  not  vice  versa.  Beat  and 
tension,  blood  and  intellect,  Destiny  and  Causality  are  to  one  another  as  the 
country-side  in  bloom  is  to  the  city  of  stone,  as  something  existing  per  se  to 
something  existing  dependently.  Tension  without  cosmic  pulsation,  to  ani- 
mate it  is  the  transition  to  nothingness.  But  Civilization  is  nothing  but 
tension.  The  head,  in  all  the  outstanding  men  of  the  Civilizations,  is  domi- 
nated exclusively  by  an  expression  of  extreme  tension.  Intelligence  is  only  the 
capacity  for  understanding  at  high  tension,  and  in  every  Culture  these  heads 
are  the  types  of  its  final  men  — one  has  only  to  compare  them  with  the  peasant 
heads,  when  such  happen  to  emerge  in  the  swirl  of  the  great  city’s  street- 
^ Pohlmann,  Aus  AlUrtum  und  Gegmwart  (1910),  pp.  2.11,  et  seq. 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE  CITY  103 

life.  The  advaiice,  too,  from  peasant  wisdom  — ‘‘slimness,”  mother  wit, 
instmet,  based  as  in  other  animals  upon  the  sensed  beat  of  life  - — through 
the  city-spirit  to  the  cosmopolitan  intelligence  ~ the  very  word  with  its 
sharp  ring  betraying  the  disappearance  of  the  old  cosmic  Wndation— can 
be  described  as  a steady  diminution  of  the  Destiny-feeling  and  an  unrestrained 
augmentation  of  needs  according  to  the  operation  of  a Causality.  Intelligence 
is  the  replacement  of  unconscious  living  by  exercise  in  thought,  masterly,  but 
bloodless  and  }ejune.  The  intelligent  visage  is  similar  in  all  races  — what  is 
recessive  in  them  is,  precisely,  race.  The  weaker  the  feeling  for  the  necessity 
and  self-evidence  of  Being,  the  more  the  habit  of  “elucidation”  grows,  the 
more  the  fear  in  the  waking-consciousness  comes  to  be  stilled  by  causal  methods. 
Hence  the  assimilation  of  knowledge  with  demonstrability,  and  the  substitu- 
tion of  scientific  theory,  the  causal  myth,  for  the  religious.  Hence,  too,  money- 
in-the-abstract  as  the  pure  causality  of  economic  life,  in  contrast  to  rustic 
barter,  which  is  pulsation  and  not  a system  of  tensions. 

Tension,  when  it  has  become  intellectual,  knows  no  form  of  recreation  but 
that  which  is  specific  to  the  world-city  — namely,  detente,  relaxation,  distrac- 
tion. Genuine  play,  joie  de  vivre,  pleasure,  inebriation,  are  products  of  the 
cosmic  beat  and  as  such  no  longer  comprehensible  in  their  essence.  But  the 
relief  of  hard,  intensive  brain-work  by  its  opposite  — conscious  and  practised 
fooling  — of  intellectual  tension  by  the  bodily  tension  of  sport,  of  bodily 
tension  by  the  sensual  straining  after  “pleasure”  and  the  spiritual  straining 
after  the  “excitements”  of  betting  and  competitions,  of  the  pure  logic  of  the 
day’s  work  by  a consciously  enjoyed  mysticism  — all  this  is  common  to  the 
world-cities  of  all  the  Civilizations.  Cinema,  Expressionism,  Theosophy, 
boxing  contests,  nigger  dances,  poker,  and  racing  — - one  can  find  it  all  in 
Rome.  Indeed,  the  connoisseur  might  extend  his  researches  to  the  Indian, 
Chinese,  and  Arabian  world-cities  as  well.  To  name  but  one  example,  if  one 
reads  the  Kama-sutram  one  understands  how  it  was  that  Buddhism  also  ap- 
pealed to  men’s  tastes,  and  then  the  bullfighting  scenes  in  the  Palace  of  Cnossus 
will  be  looked  at  with  quite  different  eyes.  A cult,  no  doubt,  underlay  them, 
but  there  was  a savour  over  it  all,  as  over  Rome’s  fashionable  Isis-cult  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Circus  Maximus. 

And  then,  when  Being  is  sufficiently  uprooted  and  Waking-Being  suffi- 
ciently strained,  there  suddenly  emerges  into  the  bright  light  of  history  a 
phenomenon  that  has  long  been  preparing  itself  underground  and  now  steps 
forward  to  make  an  end  of  the  drama  — Hsxt  sterility  of  civiU:(ed  man.  This  is 
not  something  that  can  be  grasped  as  a plain  matter  of  Causality  (as  modern 
science  naturally  enough  has  tried  to  grasp  it);  it  is  to  be  understood  as  an 
essentially  metaphysical  turn  towards  death.  The  last  man  of  the  world-city 
no  longer  wants  to  live  — he  may  cling  to  life  as  an  individual,  but  as  a type, 
as  an  aggregate,  no,  for  it  is  a characteristic  of  this  collective  existence  that  it 


104  '■  ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

eliminates  the  terror  of  death.  That  which  strikes  the  true  peasant  with  a 
deep  and  inexplicable  fear,  the  notion  that  the  family  and  the  name  may  be 
extinguished,  has  now  lost  its  meaning.  The  continuance  of  the  blood-rela- 
tion in  the  visible  world  is  no  longer  a duty  of  the  blood,  and  the  destiny  of 
being  the  last  of  the  line  is  no  longer  felt  as  a doom.  Children  do  not  happen, 
not  because  Ghildfcn  have  become  impossible,  but  principally  because  intelli- 
gence at  the  peak  of  intensity  can  no  longer  find  any  reason  for  their  existence. 
Let  the  reader  try  to  merge  himself  in  the  soul  of  the  peasant.  He  has  sat  on 
his  glebe  from  primeval  times, ^ or  has  fastened  his  clutch  in  it,  to  adhere  to  it 
with  his  blood.  He  is  rooted  in  it  as  the  descendant  of  his  forbears  and  as 
the  forbear  of  future  descendants.  Hir  house,  his  property,  means,  here,  not 
the  temporary  connexion  of  person  and  thing  for  a brief  span  of  years,  but  an 
enduring  and  inward  union  of  eternal  land  and  eternal  blood.  It  is  only  from  this 
mystical  conviction  of  settlement  that  the  great  epochs  of  the  cycle  — pro- 
creation, birth,  and  death  — derive  that  metaphysical  element  of  wonder 
which  condenses  in  the  symbolism  of  custom  and  religion  that  all  landbound 
people  possess.  For  the  “last  men”  all  this  is  past  and  gone.  Intelligence  and 
sterility  are  allied  in  old  families,  old  peoples,  and  old  Cultures,  not  merely 
because  in  each  microcosm  the  overstrained  and  fettered  animal-element  is 
eating  up  the  plant  element,  but  also  because  the  waking-consciousness  as- 
sumes that  being  is  normally  regulated  by  causality.  That  which  the  man 
of  intelligence,  most  significantly  and  characteristically,  labels  as  “natural 
impulse”  or  “life-force,”  he  not  only  knows,  but  dso  values,  causally,  giving 
it  the  place  amongst  his  other  needs  that  his  judgment  assigns  to  it.  When 
the  ordinary  thought  of  a highly  cultivated  people  begins  to  regard  “having 
children”  as  a question  of  po' s and  con  the  great  turning-point  has  come. 
For  Nature  knows  nothing  of  po  and  con.  Everywhere,  wherever  life  is 
actual,  reigns  an  inward  organic  logic,  an  “it,”  a drive,  that  is  utterly  in- 
dependent of  waking-being,  with  its  causal  linkages,  and  indeed  not  even 
observed  by  it.  The  abundant  proliferation  of  primitive  peoples  is  a natural 
phenomenon,  which  is  not  even  thought  about,  still  less  judged  as  to  its  utility  or 
the  reverse.  When  reasons  have  to  be  put  forward  at  all  in  a question  of  life, 
life  itself  has  become  questionable.  At  that  point  begins  prudent  limitation 
of  the  number  of  births.  In  the  Classical  world  the  practice  was  deplored  by 
Polybius  as  the  ruin  of  Greece,  and  yet  even  at  his  date  it  had  long  been  es- 
tablished in  the  great  cities;  in  subsequent  Roman  times  it  became  appallingly 
general.  At  first  explained  by  the  economic  misery  of  the  times,  very  soon 
it  ceased  to  explain  itself  at  all.  And  at  that  point,  too,  in  Buddhist  India 
as  in  Babylon,  in  Rome  as  in  our  own  cities,  a man’s  choice  of  the  woman  who 
is  to  be,  not  mother  of  his  children  as  amongst  peasants  and  primitives,  but 

^ Some  years  ago  a French  peasant  was  brought  to  notice  whose  family  had  occupied  its  glebe 
since  the  ninth  century.  — Tr. 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE'CITY  ' ' 105 

Ms  own  " conipamoii  for  life,"  becomes  a problem  of  mentalities.  The  Ibsen 
marriage  appears,  the  "higher  spiritual  afhnity"  in  which  both  parties  are 
"free"  — * free,  that  is,  as  intelligences,  free  from  the  plantlike  urge  of  the  blood 
to  continue  itself,  and  it  becomes  possible  for  a Shaw  to  say  "that  unless 
Woman  repudiates  her  womanliness,  her  duty  to  her  husband,  to  her  children, 
to  society,  to  the  law,  and  to  everyone  but  herself,  she  cannot  emanGipate 
herself."  ^ The  primary  woman,  the  peasant  woman,  is  mother.  The  whole 
vocation  towards  which  she  has  yearned  from  childhood  is  included  in  that 
one  word.  But  now  emerges  the  Ibsen  woman,  the  comrade,  the  heroine  of  a 
whole  megalopolitan  literature  from  Northern  drama  to  Parisian  novel.  In- 
stead of  children,  she  has  soul-conflicts;  marriage  is  a craft-art  for  the  achieve- 
ment of  “mutual  understanding."  It  is  all  the  same  whether  the  case  against 
children  is  the  American  lady’s  who  would  not  miss  a season  for  anything, 
or  the  Parisienne’s  who  fears  that  her  lover  would  leave  her,  or  an  Ibsen  hero- 
ine’s who  "belongs  to  herself"  — they  all  belong  to  themselves  and  they  are 
all  unfruitful.  The  same  fact,  in  conjunction  with  the  same  arguments,  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Alexandrian,  in  the  Roman,  and,  as  a matter  of  course,  in  every 
other  civilized  society  — and  conspicuously  in  that  in  which  Buddha  grew 
up.  And  in  Hellenism  and  in  the  nineteenth  century,  as  in  the  times  of  Lao- 
Tzu  and  the  Charvaka  doctrine,^  there  is  an  ethic  for  childless  intelligences,  and 
a literature  about  the  inner  conflicts  of  Nora  and  Nana.  The  "quiverful," 
which  was  still  an  honourable  enough  spectacle  in  the  days  of  Werther,  be- 
comes something  rather  provincial.  The  father  of  many  children  is  for  the 
great  city  a subject  for  caricature;  Ibsen  did  not  fail  to  note  it,  and  presented 
it  in  his  hope  s Comedy. 

. At  this  level  ail  Civilizations  enter  upon  a stage,  which  lasts  for  centuries, 
of  appalling  depopulation.  The  whole  pyramid  of  cultural  man  vanishes. 
It  crumbles  from  the  summit,  first  the  world-cities,  then  the  provincial  forms, 
and  finally  the  land  itself,  whose  best  blood  has  incontinently  poured  into  the 
towns,  merely  to  bolster  them  up  awhile.  At  the  last,  only  the  primitive 
blood  remains,  alive,  but  robbed  of  its  strongest  and  most  promising  elements. 
This  residue  is  the 

If  anything  has  demonstrated  the  fact  that  Causality  has  nothing  to  do  with 
history,  it  is  the  familiar  "decline"  of  the  Classical,  which  accomplished 
itself  long  before  the  irruption  of  Germanic  migrants.^  The  Imperium  enjoyed 
the  completest  peace;  it  was  rich  and  highly  developed;  it  was  well  organized; 
and  it  possessed  in  its  emperors  from  Nerva  to  Marcus  Aurelius  a series  of  rulers 
such  as  the  Cxsarism  of  no  other  Civilization  can  show.  And  yet  the  popula- 
tion dwindled,  quickly  and  wholesale.  The  desperate  marriage-and-children 

^ Shaw,  The  Quintessence  of  Ibsen. 

2 An  ancient  Hindu  materialism.  — Tr. 

2 For  what  follows  see  Eduard  Meyer,  Kl.  Schriften  (1910),  pp.  145,  et  seq. 


io6  V;.  the.  west 

laws  of  .'Augustus  — 'amongst  tliem  the  Lex  de  maritandis  ordimhus^  which  dis- 
mayed Roman  society  more  than  the  destruction  o£  Varus’s  legions  * — the 
wholesale  adoptions,  the  incessant  plantation  of  soldiers  of  barbarian  origin 
to  fill  the  depleted  country-side,  the  immense  food-charities  of  Nerva  and 
Trajan  for  the  children  of  poor  parents  — nothing  availed  to  check  the  process. 
Italy,  then  North  Africa  and  Gaul,  and  finally  Spain,  which  under  the  early 
Caesars  had  been  one  of  the  most  densely  populated  parts  of  the  Empire,  be- 
come empty  and  desolate.  The  famous  saying  of  Pliny  — so  often  and  so 
significantly  quoted  to-day  in  connexion  with  national  economics — 
fundia  perdidere  Italiam,  jam^  mro  et  provinezas,*^^  inverts  the  order  of  the  process; 
the  large  estates  would  never  have  got  to  this  point  if  the  peasantry  had  not 
already  been  sucked  into  the  towns  and,  if  not  openly,  at  any  rate  inwardly, 
surrendered  their  soil.  The  terrible  truth  came  out  at  last  in  the  edict  of  Perti- 
nax,  A.D.  193,  by  which  anyone  in  Italy  or  the  provinces  was  permitted  to 
take  possession  of  untended  land,  and  if  he  brought  it  under  cultivation,  to 
hold  it  as  his  legal  property.  The  historical  student  has  only  to  turn  his 
attention  seriously  to  other  Civilizations  to  find  the  same  phenomenon  every- 
where. Depopulation  can  be  distinctly  traced  in  the  background  of  the  Egyp- 
tian New  Empire,  especially  from  the  XIX  dynasty  onwards.  Street  widths 
like  those  of  Amenophis  IV  at  Tell-el-Amarna  — of  fifty  yards  — would  have 
been  unthinkable  with  the  denser  population  of  the  old  days.  The  onset  of 
the  “Sea-peoples,"’  too,  was  only  barely  repulsed  — their  chances  of  obtaining 
possession  of  the  realm  were  certainly  not  less  promising  than  those  of  the 
Germans  of  the  fourth  century  vis-d-vis  the  Roman  world.  And  finally  the 
incessant  infiltration  of  Libyans  into  the  Delta  culminated  when  one  of  their 
leaders  seized  the  power,  in  945  b.c.  — precisely  as  Odoacer  seized  it  in  a.d.  476, 
But  the  same  tendency  can  be  felt  in  the  history  of  political  Buddhism  after 
the  Cxsar  Asoka.^  If  the  Maya  population  literally  vanished  within  a very 
short  time  after  the  Spanish  conquest,  and  their  great  empty  cities  were 
reabsorbed  by  the  jungle,  this  does  not  prove  merely  the  brutality  of  the  con- 
queror — which  in  this  regard  would  have  been  helpless  before  the  self-renew- 
ing  power  of  a young  and  fruitful  Culture-mankind  — but  an  extinction  from 
within  that  no  doubt  had  long  been  in  progress.  And  if  we  turn  to  our  own 
civilization,  we  find  that  the  old  families  of  the  French  noblesse  were  not,  in 
the  great  majority  of  cases,  eradicated  in  the  Revolution,  but  have  died  out 
since  1815,  and  their  sterility  has  spread  to  the  bourgeoisie  and,  since  1870,  to  the 
peasantry  which  that  very  Revolution  almost  re-created.  In  England,  and  still 
more  in  the  United  States  — particularly  in  the  east,  the  very  states  where  the 
stock  is  best  and  oldest  — the  process  of  **race  suicide:,’’  denounced  by  Roose- 
velt set  in  long  ago  on  the  largest  scale. 

1 Hist,  Nat.,  XVm,  7.  — Tr. 

^ Wc  know  of  measures  to  promote  iucreasc  of  population  in  China  in  the  third  century  b.c., 
precisely  the  Augustan  Age  of  Chinese  evolutiop.  See  Rosthorn,  Das  soziak  Lehen  der  Chimsen  (1919), 


THE  SOUL  OF  THE  CITY  ■ .107 

CoiisequcGtly  we  fiod  everywhere  in  these  Civilizations  that,  the  provincial 
cities  at  an  early  stage,  and  the  giant  cities  in  turn  at  the  end  of  the  evolution, 
stand  empty,  harbouring  in  their  stone  masses  a small  population  of  fellaheen 
w^ho  shelter  in  them  as  the  men  of  the  Stone  Age  sheltered  in  caves  and  pile- 
dwellings.^  Samarra  was  abandoned  by  the  tenth  century;  Pataliputra,  Asoka’s 
capital,  was  an  immense  and  completely  uninhabited  waste  of  houses  when 
the  Chinese  traveller  Hiouen-tsang  visited  it  about  a.d.  635,  and  many  of  the 
great  Maya  cities  must  have  been  in  that  condition  even  in  Cortez’s  time. 
In  a long  series  of  Classical  writers  from  Polybius  onward  * we  read  of  old, 
renowned  cities  in  which  the  streets  have  become  lines  of  empty,  crumbling 
shells,  where  the  cattle  browse  in  forum  and  gymnasium,  and  the  amphitheatre 
is  a sown  field, ^ dotted  with  emergent  statues  and  herms.  Rome  had  in  the 
fifth  century  of  our  era  the  population  of  a village,  but  its  Imperial  palaces 
were  still  habitable. 

This,  then,  is  the  conclusion  of  the  city’s  history;  growing  from  primitive 
barter-centre  to  Culture-city  and  at  last  to  world-city,  it  sacrifices  first  the 
blood  and  soul  of  its  creators  to  the  needs  of  its  majestic  evolution,  and  then 
the  last  flow^er  of  that  growth  to  the  spirit  of  Civilization  — and  so,  doomed, 
moves  on  to  final  self-destruction. 

VI 

If  the  Early  period  is  characterized  by  the  birth  of  the  City  out  of  the 
country,  and  the  Late  by  the  battle  between  city  and  country,  the  period  of 
Civilization  is  that  of  the  victory  of  city  over  country,  whereby  it  frees  itself 
from  the  grip  of  the  ground,  but  to  its  own  ultimate  ruin.  Rootless,  dead 
to  the  cosmic,  irrevocably  committed  to  stone  and  to  intellectualism,  it  de- 
velops a form-language  that  reproduces  every  trait  of  its  essence  — not  the 
language  of  a becoming  and  growth,  but  that  of  a becomeness  and  completion, 
capable  of  alteration  certainly,  but  not  of  evolution.  Not  now  Destiny,  but 
Causality,  not  now  living  Direction,  but  Extension,  rules.  It  follows  from 
this  that  whereas  every  form-language  of  a Culture,  together  with  the  history 
of  its  evolution,  adheres  to  the  original  spot,  civilized  forms  are  at  home 
anywhere  and  capable,  therefore,  of  unlimited  extension  as  soon  as  they  appear. 
It  is  quite  true  that  the  Hanse  Towns  in  their  north-Russian  staples  built  Goth- 
ically,  and  the  Spaniards  in  South  America  in  the  Baroque  style,  but  that  even 
the  smallest  chapter  of  Gothic  stylt-history  should  evolve  outside  the  limits  of 

^ The  amphitheatres  of  Nlmes  and  Arles  were  filled  up  by  mean  townlcts  that  used  the  outer  wall 
as  their  fortifications.  — Tr, 

2 Strabo,  Pausanias,  Dio  Chrysostom,  Avienus,  etc.  See  E.  Meyer,  K.I.  Schriften,  pp.  164,  et  scq. 

3 The  Colosseum  of  Rome  itself  in  due  course  fell  into  this  decay  and  we  read  in  the  guide-books 
that  “its  flora  were  once  famous  ” — 420  wild  species  lived  in,  its  ruins.  If  this  could  happen  in 
Rome,  we  need  not  be  surprised  at  the  quick,  almost  catastrophic,  conquest  of  the  Maya  cities  by 
tropical  vegetation.  — Tr. 


ia8  ^ .'.'THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

West  E^rope  was  impossible,  as  impossible  as  that  Attic  or  English  drama, 
or  the  art  of  fugue,  or  the  Lutheran  or  the  Orphic  religion  should  be  propa- 
gated, or  even  inwardly  assimilated,  by  men  of  alien  Cultures.  But  the  essence 
of  Alexandrinism  and  of  our  Romanticism' is  something  which  belongs  to  all  ur- 
ban men  without  distinction.  Romanticism  marks  the  beginning  of  that  which 
Goethe,  with  Ms  wide  vision,  called  world-literature  — the  literature  of  the 
leading  world-rij^,  against  which  a provincial  literature,  native  to  the  soil 
but  negligible,  struggles  everywhere  with  difficulty  to  maintain  itself.  The 
state  of  ¥enice,  or  that  of  Frederick  the  Great,  or  the  English  Parliament  (as 
an  effective  reality),  cannot  be  reproduced,  but  ‘‘modern  constitutions’”  can  be 
“ introduced’*  into  any  African  or  Asiatic  state  as  Classical  Poleis  could  be  set  up 
amongst  Numidians  and  ancient  Britons.  In  Egypt  the  writing  that  came  into 
common  use  was  not  the  hieroglyphic,  but  the  letter-script,  which  was  with- 
out doubt  a technical  discovery  of  the  Civilization  Age.^  And  so  in  general 
— it  is  not  true  Culture-languages  like  the  Greek  of  Sophocles  or  the  German 
of  Luther,,  but  world-languages  like  the  Greek  Koine  and  Arabic  and 
Babylonian  and  English,  the  outcome  of  daily  practical  usage  in  a world- 
city,  which  are  capable  of  being  acquired  by  anybody  and  everybody.  Con- 
sequently, in  all  Civilizations  the  “modern”  cities  assume  a more  and  more 
uniform  type.  Go  where  we  may,  there  are  Berlin,  London,  and  New  Ifork 
for  us,  just  a’s  the  Roman  traveller  would  find  his  columnar  architecture, 
his  fora  with  their  statuary,  and  his  temples  in  Palmyra  or  Trier  or  Timgad 
or  the  Hellenistic  cities  that  extended  out  to  the  Indus  and  the  Aral.  But  that 
which  was  thus  disseminated  was  no  longer  a style,  but  a taste,  not  genuine 
custom  but  mannerism,  not  national  costume  but*  the  fashion.  This,  of 
course,  makes  it  possible  for  remote  peoples  not  only  to  accept  the  “permanent” 
gains  of  a Civilization,  but  even  to  re-radiate  them  in  an  independent  form. 
Such  regions  of  “moonlight**  civilization  are  south  China  and  especially 
Japan  (which  were  first  Sinized  at  the  close  of  the  Han  period,  about 
A.D.  2.20);  Java  as  a relay  of  the  Brahman  Civilization;  and  Carthage,  which 
obtained  its  forms  from  Babylon- 

All  these  are  forms  of  a waking-consciousness  now  acute  to  excess,  mitigated 
or  limited  by  no  cosmic  force,  purely  intellectual  and  extensive,  but  on  that 
very  account  capable  of  so  powerful  an  output  that  their  last  flickering  rays 
reach  out  and  superpose  effects  over  almost  the  whole  earth.  Fragments  of 
the  forms  of  Chinese  Civilization  are  probably  to  be  found  in  Scandinavian  wood- 
architecture,  Babylonian  measures  probably  in  the  South  Seas,  Classical  coins 
in  South  Africa,  Egyptian  and  Indian  influences  probably  in  the  land  of  the 
Incas. 

But  while  this  process  of  extension  was  overpassing  all  frontiers,  the 

^ According  to  the  researches  of  K.  Sethe.  Cf.  Robert  Eisler,  Die  kenitischen  W eihinschriften  der 
Hyksos^eif,  etc, 


THE  :SOUL  OF  THE  CITY  109 

development  of  iniicf  form  of  the  Civilization  was  fulfilling'  itself  with  im- 
pressive consistencf.  Three  stages  are  clearly  to  be  distinguished  — the  re-  ' 
lease  from  the  Culture,  the  production  of  the  thoroughbred  Civilization-form, 
and  the  final  hardening.  For  us  this  development  has  now  set  in,  and,  as  I 
see  it,  it  is  Germany  that  is  destined,  as  the  last  nation  of  the  West,  to  crown 
the  mighty  edifice.  In  this  stage  all  questions  of  the  life  — the  Apollinian, 
Magian,  or  Faustian  life  — have  been  thought  upon  to  the  limit,  and  brought 
to  a final  clear  condition  of  knowledge  and  not~knowledge.  For  or  about 
ideas  men  fight  no  more.  The  last  idea  — that  of  the  Civilization  itself — is 
formulated  in  outline,  and*  technics  and  economics  are,  as  poblems,  enunciated 
and  prepared  for  handling.  But  this  is  only  the  beginning  of  a vast  task; 
the  postulates  have  to  be  unfolded  and  these  forms  applied  to  the  whole  ex- 
istence of  the  earth.  Only  when  this  has  been  accomplished  and  the  Civ- 
ilization has  become  definitely  established  not  only  in  shape,  but  in  mass, 
does  the  hardening  of  the  form  set  in.  Style,  in  the  Cultures,  has  been  the 
rhythm  qJ  the  process  of  self-implementing.  But  the  Civilized  style  (if  we  may 
use  the  word  at  all)  arises  as  the  expression  of  the  state  of  completeness.  It  attains 
— in  Egypt  and  China  especially  — to  a splendid  perfection,  and  imparts 
this  perfection  to  all  the  utterances  of  a life  that  is  now  inwardly  unalter- 
able, to  its  ceremonial  and  mien  as  to  the  superfine  and  studied  forms  of  its 
art-practice.  Of  history,  in  the  sense  of  an  urge  towards  a form-ideal,  there 
can  now  be  no  question,  but  there  is  an  unfailing  and  easy  superficial  adap- 
tiveness which  again  and  again  manages  to  coax  fresh  little  art-problems 
and  solutions  out  of  the  now  basically  stable  language.  Of  this  kind  is  the 
whole  ‘‘history''  of  Chinese-Japanese  painting  (as  we  know  it)  and  of  Indian 
architecture.  And  just  as  the  real  history  of  the  Gothic  style  differs  from  this 
pseudo-history,  so  the  Knight  of  the  Crusades  differs  from  the  Chinese  Man- 
darin — the  becoming  state  from  the  finished.  The  one  ij  history;  the  other  has 
long  ago  overcome  history.  “Long  ago,"  I say;  for  the  history  of  these 
Civilizations  is  merely  apparent,  like  their  great  cities,  which  constantly 
change  in  face,  but  never  become  other  than  what  they  are.  In  these  cities 
there  is  no  Soul.  They  are  land  in  petrified  form. 

What  is  it  that  perishes  here?  And  what  that  survives?  It  is  a mere  in- 
cident that  German  peoples,  under  pressure  from  the  Huns,  take  possession  of 
the  Roman  landscape  and  so  prevent  the  Classical  from  prolonging  itself  in  a 
“Chinese"  end-state.  The  movement  of  the  “Sea-peoples"  (similar  to  the 
Germanic,  even  down  to  the  details)  which  set  in  against  the  Egyptian  Civili- 
zation from  1400  B.c.  succeeded  only  as  regards  the  Cretan  island-realm  — 
their  mighty  expeditions  against  the  Libyan  and  Phoenician  coasts,  with  the 
accompaniment  of  Viking  fleets,  failed,  as  those  of  the  Huns  failed  against 
China.  And  thus  the  Classical  is  our  one  example  of  a Civilization  broken  off 
in  the  moment  of  full  splendour.  Yet  the  Germans  only  destroyed  the  upper 


IIO  ■ ■ : DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

laycr/of  the  forms  and  replaced  it  by  the  life  of  their  own  prc-Cnltiirc.  . The 
** eternal' ' layer  was  never  reached.  It  remains,  hidden  and  completely  shrouded 
by  a new  form-language,  in  the  underground  of  the  whole  following  history, 
and  to  this  day  in  southern  France,  southern  Italy,  and  northern  Spain  tangible 
relics  of  it  endure.  In  these  countries  the  popular  Catholicism  is  tinged  from 
beneath  with  a Late  Classical  colouring,  that  sets  it  off  quite  distinctly  from 
the  Church  Catholicism  of  the  West-European  layer  above  it.  South  Italian 
Church-festivals  disclose  Classical  (and  even  pre-Classical)  cults,  and  generally 
in  this  field  there  are  to  be  found  deities  (saints)  in  whose  worship  the  Classical 
constitution  is  visible  behind  the  Catholic  names.  * 

Here,  however,  another  element  comes  into  the  picture,  an  element  with 
a significance  of  its  owq.  We  stand  before  the  problem  of  Race. 


CHAPTER  V 


CITIES  AND  PEOPLES 
CB)  , 

PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES 


CHAPTER  V 


CITIES  AND  PEOPLES 

(B) 

PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES 
1 ■ 

Throughout  the  nineteenth  centur7  the  scientific  picture  of  history  was 
vitiated  by  a notion  that  was  either  derived  from,  or  at  any  rate  brought  to  a 
point  by,  Romanticism  — the  idea  of  the  "People’*  in  the  moral-enthusiastic 
sense  of  the  word.  If,  here  and  there,  in  earlier  time  a new  religion,  a new 
ornamentation,  a new  architecture,  or  a new  script  appeared,  the  question 
that  it  raised  presented  itself  to  the  investigator  thus  — What  was  the  name 
of  the  people  who  produced  the  phenomenon?  This  enunciation  of  the  problem 
is  peculiar  to  the  Western  spirit  and  the  present-day  cast  of  that  spirit;  but 
it  is  so  false  at  every  point  that  the  picture  that  it  evokes  of  the  course  of 
events  must  necessarily  be  erroneous.  "The  people”  as  the  absolute  basic  form 
in  which  men  are  historically  effective,  the  original  home,  the  original  settle- 
ment, the  migrations  of  "the”  peoples — all  this  is  a reflection  of  the  vibrant 
idea  expressed  in  the  Nation  ' of  1789,  of  the  of  1813,  both  of  which, 

in  last  analysis,  are  derived  from  the  self-assuredness  of  England  and  Puritanism. 
But  the  very  intensity  of  passion  that  the  idea  contains  has  protected  it  only 
too  well  from  criticism.  Even  acute  investigators  have  unwittingly  made  it 
cover  a multitude  of  utterly  dissimilar  things,  with  the  result  that  "peoples” 
have  developed  into  definite  and  supposedly  well-understood  unit-quantities 
by  which  all  history  is  made.  For  us,  to-day,  world-history  means  — what  it 
cannot  be  asserted  to  mean  self-evidently,  or  to  mean  for,  e.g.,  the  Greeks 
and  the  Chinese — the  history  of  Peoples.  Everything  else,  Culture,  speech, 
wit,  religion,  is  created  by  the  peoples.  The  State  is  the  form  of  a people. 

The  purpose  of  this  chapter  is  to  demolish  this  romantic  conception.  What 
has  inhabited  the  earth  since  the  Ice  Age  is  man,  not  "peoples.”  In  the  first 
instance,  their  Destiny  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  the  bodily  succession  of 
parents  and  children,  the  bond  of  the  blood,  forms  natural  groups,  which  dis- 
close a definite  tendency  to  take  .root  in  a landscape.  Even  nomadic  tribes 
confine  their  movements  within  a limited  field.  Thereby  the  cosmic-plantlikc 
side  of  life,  of  Being,  is  invested  with  a character  of  duration.  This  I call  race. 
Tribes,  septs,  clans,  families  — all  these  are  designations  for  the  fact  of  a blood 
which  circles,  carried  on  by  procreation,  in  a narrow  or  a wide  landscape. 

^13 


114'  THE  'DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

: But  these  Euman  beings  possess  also  the  inicrocosmic-aniinal  side  of  life, 
in  'waking-consciousness  and  receptivity  and  reason.  And  the  form  in  m^-hich 
the  waking-consciousness  of  one  man  gets  into  relation  with  that  of  anothet 
I call  language y,  which,  begins  by  being  a mere  unconscious  living  expression 
that  is  received  as  a sensation,  but  gradually  develops  into  a conscious  technique 
of  commumcation  that  depends  upon  a common  sense  of  the  meanings  attaching 
to  signs. 

In  the  limit,  every  race  is  a single  great  body,  and  every  language  ^ the 
efficient  form  of  one  great  waking-consciousness  that  connects  many  individual 
beings.  And  we  shall  never  reach  the  ultimate  discoveries  about  either  unless 
they  are  treated  together  and  constantly  brought  into  comparison  with  one 
another. 

But,  further,  we  shall  never  understand  man’s  higher  history  if  w^e  ignore 
the  fact  that  man,  as  constituent  of  a race  and  as  possessor  of  a language,  as 
derivative  of  a blood-unit  and  as  member  of  an  understanding-unit,  has  different 
Destinies,  that  of  his  being  and  that  of  his  waking-being.  That  is,  the  origin, 
development,  and  duration  of  his  race  side  and  the  origin,  development,  and 
duration  of  his  language  side  are  comfletely  independent  of  one  amthet.  Race  is 
something  cosmic  and  psychic  (Seeknhaft)^  periodic  in  some  obscure  way,  and  in  its 
inner  nature  partly  conditioned  by  major  astronomical  relations. 

Languages,  on  the  other  hand,  are  causal  forms,  and  operate  through  the 
polarity  of  their  means.  We  speak  of  race-instincts  and  of  the  spirit  of  a lan- 
guage. But  they  are  two  distinct  worlds.  To  Race  belong  the  deepest  meanings 
of  the  words  * ‘ time  ’ ’ and  ‘ * yearning  ” ; to  language  those  of  the  words  * * space  ’ ’ 
and  ‘Tear.”  But  all  this  has  been  hidden  from  us,  hitherto,  by  the  overlying 
idea  of  “peoples.” 

There  are,  then,  currents  of  being  and  linkages  of  waking-being.  The  former 
have  physiognomy,  the  latter  are  based  on  system.  Race,  as  seen  in  the  picture 
of  the  world-around,  is  the  aggregate  of  all  bodily  characters  so  far  as  these 
exist  for  the  sense-perceptions  of  conscious  creatures.  Here  we  have  to  re- 
member that  a body  develops  and  fulfils  from  childhood  to  old  age  the  specific 
inner  form  that  was  assigned  to  it  at  the  moment  of  its  conception,  while  at 
the  same  time  that  which  the  body  is  (considered  apart  from  its  form)  is  per- 
petually being  renewed.  Consequently  nothing  of  the  body  actually  remains 
in  the  man  except  the  living  meaning  of  his  existence,  and  of  this  all  that  we 
know  is  so  much  as  presents  itself  in  the  world  of  waking-consciousness. 
Man  of  the  higher  sort  is  limited,  as  to  the  impression  of  race  that  he  can  re- 
ceive, almost  wholly  to  what  appears  in  the  light-world  of  his  eye,  so  that  for 
him  race  is  essentially  a sum  of  characters.  But  even  for  him  there  are  not 

^ Henceforward,  and  indeed  throughout  this  work,  the  word  “language”  is  not  to  be  regarded 
as  limited  to  spoken  and  written  language.  As  the  above  definition  indicates,  it  includes  all 
modes  of  intelligible  conscious-expression  — affective  language”  in  the  widest  sense.  — Tr. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  115 

inconsiderable  relics  of  the  power  to  observe  non-optical  characters  such  as 
smell,  the  cries  of  animals,  and,  above  all,  the  modalities  of  human  speech.  In 
the  other  higher  animals,  on  the  contrary,  the  capacity  to  receive  the  impression 
of  race  is  decidedly  not  dominated  by  sight.  Scent  is  stronger,  and,  besides,  the 
animals  have  modes  of  sensation  that  entirely  elude  human  understanding,  it  is, 
however,  only  men  and  animals  that  can  receive  the  impression  of  race,  and  not  the 
plants,  and  yet  these  too  have  race,  as  every  nurseryman  knows.  It  is,  to  me,  a 
sight  of  deep  pathos  to  see  how  the  spring  flowers,  craving  to  fertili2:e  and  be 
fertilized,  cannot  for  all  their  bright  splendour  attract  one  another,  or  even  see 
one  another,  but  must  have  recourse  to  animals,  for  whom  alone  these  colours 
and  these  scents  exist. 

“ Language’  ’ I call  the  entire  free  activity  of  the  waking  microcosm  in  so  far 
as  it  brings  something  to  expression  for  others.  Plants  have  no  waking-being, 
no  capacity  of  being  moved,  and  therefore  no  language.  The  waking-conscious- 
ness of  animal  existences,  on  the  contrary,  is  through  and  through  a speaking, 
whether  individual  acts  are  intended  to  tell  or  not,  and  even  if  the  conscious 
or  the  unconscious  purpose  of  the  doing  lies  in  a quite  other  direction.  A 
peacock  is  indubitably  speaking  when  he  spreads  his  tail,  but  a kitten  playing 
with  a cotton-reel  also  speaks  to  us,  unconsciously,  through  the  quaint  charm 
of  its  movements.  Everyone  knows  the  difference  there  is  in  one’s  movements 
according  as  one  is  conscious  or  unconscious  of  being  observed;  one  suddenly 
begins  to  speak,  consciously,  in  all  one’s  actions. 

This,  however,  leads  at  once  to  the  very  significant  distinction  between 
two  genera  of  language  — the  language  which  is  only  an  expression  for  the 
world,  an  inward  necessity  springing  from  the  longing  inherent  in  all  life  to 
actualize  itself  before  witnesses,  to  display  its  own  presence  to  itself,  and  the 
language  that  is  meant  to  be  understood  by  definite  beings.  There  are,  therefore, 
expression-languages  and  communication-languages.  The  former  assume  only  a 
state  of  waking-being,  the  latter  a connexion  of  waking-beings.  To  understand 
means  to  respond  to  the  stimulus  of  a signal  with  one’s  own  feeling  of  its 
significance.  To  understand  one  another,  to  hold  '‘conversation,”  to  speak  to 
a “ thou,”  supposes,  therefore,  a sense  of  meanings  in  the  other  that  corresponds 
to  that  in  oneself.  Expression-language  before  witnesses  merely  proves  the 
presence  of  an  **I,”  but  communication-language  postulates  a "thou.”  The 
"I”  is  that  which  speaks,  and  the  "thou”  that  which  is  meant  to  understand 
the  speech  of  the  " I.  ” For  primitives  a tree,  a stone,  or  a cloud  can  be  a " thou. 
Every  deity  is  a "thou.”  In  fairy-tales  there  is  nothing  that  cannot  hold 
converse  with  men,  and  we  need  only  look  at  our  own  selves  in  moments  of 
furious  irritation  or  of  poetic  excitement  to  realize  that  anything  can  become 
a " thou”  for  us  even  to-day.  And  it  is  by  some  " thou”  that  we  first  came  to 
the  knowledge  of  an  "I.”  "I,”  therefore,  is  a designation  for  the  fact  that  a 
bridge  exists  to  some  other  being. 


: THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

■ It  is  impossible,.. however,  to  delimit  an  exact  fronticf. between  religious 
and  artistic  expression-languages  and  pure  communication-langu'agcs.  This'ds' 
true  also  (and  indeed  specially)  of  the  higher  Cultures  with  the  separate  develop- 
ment of  their  form-domains.  . For,  on. the  one  hand,. no  one  can.  speak  without 
putting  into  his  mode  of  speech  some  significant  trait  of  emphasis  that  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  needs  of  communication  as  such;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  ail  know  the  drama  in  which' the  poet  wants  to  '*say**  something 
that  he  .could  have  said  equally  well  or  better  in  an  exhortation,  and  the  pai.nt- 
ing whose ■ contents  are  meant  to, instruct,  warn,  or  improve  — the  picture- 
series  in  any  Greek  .Orthodox  church,,  which  conforms  to  a strict  canon  and  has 
the  avowed  purpose  of  making  the  truths  of  religion  clear  to  a beholder  to  whom 
the  book  says  nothing;  or  Hogarth’s  substitute  for  sermons;  or,  for  that  matter, 
even  prayer, ' the  direct  address  to  God,  which  also  can  be  replaced  by  the 
performance  before  one’s  eyes  of  cult-ritual  that  speaks  to  one  intelligibly. 
The  theoretical  controversy  concerning  the  purpose  of  art  rests  upon  the  postu- 
late that  an  artistic  expression-language  should  in  no  wise  be  a communication- 
language,  and  the  phenomenon  of  priesthood  is  based  upon  the  persuasion 
that  the  priest  alone  knows  the  language  in  which  man  can  communicate  wdth 
God. 

All  currents  of  Being  bear  a historical,  and  all  linkages  of  Waking-Being  a 
religious,  stamp.  (What  we  know  to  be  inherent  in  every  genuine  religious  or 
artistic  form-language,  and  particularly  in  the  history  of  every  script  (for  writ- 
ing is  verbal  language  for  the  eye),  holds  good  without  doubt  for  the  origin  of 
human  articulate  speech  in  general  — indeed  the  prime  words  (of  the  structure 
of  which  we  now  know  nothing  whatever)  must  also  certainly  have  had  a 
cult-colouring.  But  there  is  a corresponding  linkage  on  the  other  side  between 
Race  and  everything  that  we  call  life  (as  struggle  for  power),  History  (as 
Destiny),  or,  to-day,  politics.  It  is  perhaps  too  fantastic  to  argue  something 
of  political  instinct  in  the  search  of  a climbing  plant  for  points  of  attachment 
that  shall  enable  it  to  encircle,  overpower,  and  choke  the  tree  in  order  finally  to 
rear  itself  high  in  the  air  above  the  tree-top  — or  something  of  religious  world- 
feeling  in  the  song  of  the  mounting  lark.  But  it  is  certain  that  from  such 
things  as  these  the  utterances  of  being  and  of  waking-being,  of  pulse  and  ten- 
sion, form  an  uninterrupted  series  up  to  the  perfected  political  and  religious 
forms  of  every  modern  Civilization. 

And  here  at  last  is  the  key  to  those  two  strange  words  which  were  discovered 
by  the  ethnologists  in  two  entirely  difFerent  parts  of  the  world  in  rather  limited 
applications,  but  have  since  been  quietly  moving  up  into  the  foreground  of 
research — '"totem*  and  "taboo**  The  more  enigmatic  and  indefinable  these 
words  became,  the  more  it  was  felt  that  in  them  we  were  touching  upon  an 
ultimate  life-basis  which  was  not  that  of  merely  primitive  man.  And  now,  as 
the  result  of  the  above  inquiry,  we  have  clear  meanings  for  both  before  us. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 117 

Totem  and  Taboo  describe  the  ultimate  meanings  of  Being  and  Waking-Being, 
Destiny  and  Causality,  Race  and  Language,  Time  and  Space,  yearning  and 
fear,  pulse  and  tension,  politics  and  religion.  The  Totem  side  of  life  is  plant- 
like and  inheres  in  all  being,  while  the  Taboo  side  is  animal  and  presupposes 
the  free  movement  of  a being  in  a world.  Our  Totem  organs  are  those  of  the 
blood-circulation  and  of  reproduction,  our  Taboo  organs  those  of  the  senses 
and  the  nerves.  All  that  is  of  Totem  has  physiognomy,  all  that  is  of  Taboo 
has  system.  In  the  Totemistic  resides  the  common  feeling  of  beings  that 
belong  to  the  same  stream  of  existence.  It  cannot  be  acquired  and  cannot  be 
got  rid  of;  it  is  a fact,  the  fact  of  all  facts.  That  which  is  of  Taboo,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  the  characteristic  of  linkages  of  waking-consciousness,  it  is 
learnable  and  acquirable,  and  on  that  very  account  guarded  as  a secret  by 
cult-communities,  philosophers*  schools,  and  artists*  guilds— - each  of  which 
possesses  a sort  of  cryptic  language  of  its  own.  ^ 

But  Being  can  be  thought  of  without  waking-consciousness,  whereas  the 
reverse  is  not  the  case  — i.e.,  there  are  race-beings  without  language,  but  no 
languages  without  race.  All  that  is  of  race,  therefore,  possesses  its  proper 
expression,  independent  of  any  kind  of  waking-consciousness  and  common  to 
plant  and  animal.  This  expression  — not  to  be  confounded  with  the  ex- 
iptcssionrlanguage  which  consists  in  an  active  alteration  of  the  expression  — is  not 
meant  for  witnesses,  but  is  simply  there;  it  is  physiognomy.  Not  that  it  stops 
at  the  plant;  in  every  living  language,  too  (and  how  significant  the  word 
“living”!)  we  can  detect,  besides  the  Taboo  side  that  is  learnable,  an  entirely 
untransferable  quality  of  race  that  the  old  vessels  of  the  language  cannot  pass 
on  to  alien  successors;  it  lies  in  melody,  rhythm,  stress;  in  colour,  ring,  and 
tempo  of  the  expression;  in  idiom,  in  accompanying  gesture.  On  this  account 
it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  language  and  speaking,  the  first  being  in 
itself  a dead  stock  of  signs,  and  the  second  the  activity  that  operates  with  the 
signs. ^ When  we  cease  to  be  able  to  hear  and  see  directly  how  a language  is 
spoken,  thenceforward  it  is  only  its  ossature  and  not  its  flesh  that  we  can  know. 
This  is  so  with  Sumerian,  Gothic,  Sanskrit,  and  all  other  languages  that  we 
have  merely  deciphered  from  texts  and  inscriptions,  and  we  are  right  in  calling 
these  languages  dead,  for  the  human  communities  that  were  formed  by  them 
have  vanished.  We  know  the  Egyptian  tongue,  but  not  the  tongues  of  the 
Egyptians.  Of  Augustan  Latin  we  know  approximately  the  sound-values  of 
the  letters  and  the  meaning  of  the  words,  but  we  do  not  know  how  the  oration 

^ Obviously,  Totemistic  facts,  so  far  as  they  come  utidcr  the  observation  of  the  waking- 
consciousness, obtain  a significance  of  the  Taboo  kind  also;  much  in  man’s  sexual  life,  for  example, 
is  performed  with  a profound  sense  of  fear,  because  his  will-to-undcrstand  is  baffled  by  it. 

2 W.  von  Humboldt  (jjhr  die  Verschiedenheit  des  mnschUchen  Sfrachhaues)  was  the  first  to  empha- 
size the  fact  that  a language  is  not  a thing,  but  an  activity.  “If  wc  would  be  quite  precise,  we 
can  certainly  say  there  is  no  such  thing  as  'language,^  just  as  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘ intellect’;  but 
man  does  speak,  and  docs  act  intellectually.” 


the:  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST, 

of  Cicero  sounded  from  .the  .rostra  and  still  less  how  Hesiod  and  Sappho  spoke 
their  verses j. or  .what'  a conversation  in  the  Athenian  market-place  .was ..really 
like..  If  in; .the  Gothic  age  Latin  came  into  actual  s|«cch  .again,  .it  was  as  a 
new,  language;  this  Gothic  Latin  did  not  take  long  to  pass  ,from  the  formation 
of '.rhythms  and  sounds  ch.aracteristic  of  itself  (but  which  out;  im.agination 
;to.-day,  .cannot  recapture,  any  .more-  than  those  of  old  Latin)  to  encroachments 
upon' the  word-meanings  and  the  syntax  as  well.  But  the  anti-Gothic  Latin 
of  the  Humanists,  too,  which  was  meant  to  be  Ciceronian,  was  anything  but 
a revivaL  The  whole  significance  of  the  race-element  in  language  can  be 
measured  by  comparing  the  German  of  Nietzsche  and  of  Mommsen,  the  French 
of  Diderot  and  of  Napoleon,  and  observing  that  in  idiom  Voltaire  and  Lessing 
are  much  closer  together  than  Lessing  and  Holderlin. 

It  is  the  same  with  the  most  telling  of  all  the  expression-languages,  art. 
The  Taboo  side  — namely,  the  stock  of  forms,  the  rules  of  convention,  and 
style  in  so  far  as  it  means  an  armoury  of  established  expedients  (like  vocabulary 
and  syntax  in  verbal  language)  — stands  for  the  language  itself,  which  can 
be  learned.  And  it  is  learned  and  transmitted  in  the  tradition  of  the  great 
schools  of  painting,  the  cottage-building  tradition,  and  generally  in  the 
strict  craft-discipline  which  every  genuine  art  possesses  as  a matter  of  course 
and  which  in  all  ages  has  been  meant  to  give  the  sure  command  of  the  idiom 
that  at  a particular  time  is  quite  definitely  living  idiom  of  that  time.  For 
in  this  domain,  too,  there  are  living  and  dead  languages.  The  form-language 
of  an  art  can  only  be  called  living,  when  the  artist  corps  as  a whole  employs  it 
like  a mother  tongue,  which  one  uses  without  even  thinking  about  its  structure. 
In  this  sense  Gothic  in  the  sixteenth  century  and  Rococo  in  1800  were  both 
dead  languages.  Contrast  the  unqualified  sureness  with  which  architects 
and  musicians  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  expressed  themselves 
with  the  hesitations  of  Beethoven,  the  painfully  acquired,  almost  self-taught, 
-philological  art  of  Schinkel  and  Schadow,^  the  manglings  of  the  Pre-Raphaelites 
and  the  Neo-Gothics,  and  the  baffled  experimentalism  of  present-day  artists. 

In  an  artistic  form-language,  as  presented  to  us  by  its  products,  the  voice  of 
the  Totem  side,  the  race,  makes  itself  heard,  and  not  less  so  in  individual 
artists  than  in  whole  generations  of  artists.  The  creators  of  the  Doric  temples 
of  South  Italy  and  Sicily,  and  those  of  the  brick  Gothic  of  North  Germany  were 
emphatically  race-men,  and  so  too  the  German  musicians  from  Heinrich 
Schiitz  to  Johann  Sebastian  Bach.  To  the  Totem  side  belong  the  influences  of 
the  cosmic  cycles  — the  importance  of  which  in  the  structure  of  art-history 
has  hardly  been  suspected,  let  alone  established  — and  the  creative  times  of 
spring  and  love-stirrings  which  (apart  altogether  from  the  executive  sureness  in 

^ Hans  Ffiedricb.  Schinkel  (1781-1841),  architect  of  the  Opera  House,  the  Altes  Museum,  and  the 
Konigswachc  of  Berlin.  Gottfried  Schadow  (1764-1850),  sculptor  (statues  of  Frederick  11,  Zieten, 
etc.;  Quadriga  of  Brandenburger  Tor),  a classicist  malgri  lui  (not  to  be  confused  with  two  other 
artists  of  the  same  name,  quasi-contemporaries).  — Tr. 


peoples;:  races,  tongues  : ■ 119 

imparting  form)  determine  the  force  of  the  forms  and  the  depth  of  the  concep- 
tions, The  formalists  are  explained  by  depth  of  world-fear  or  by  defect  of 
“race/*  and  the  great  formless  ones  by  plethora  of  blood  or  defect  of  discipline. 
We  comprehend  that  there  is  a difference  between  the  history  of  artists  and  that 
of  styles,  and  that  the  language  of  an  art  may  be  carried  from  country  to  country, 
but  mastery  in  speaking  it,  never. 

A race  has  roots.  Race  and  landscapeEelong  together.  Where  a plant  takes 
root,  there  it  dies  also.  There  is  certainly  a sense  in  which  we  can,  without 
absurdity,  work  backwards  from  a race  to  its  “home,**  but  it  is  much  more 
important  to  realize  that  the  race  adheres  permanently  to  this  home  with  some 
of  its  most  essential  characters  of  body  and  soul.  If  in  that  home  the  race 
cannot  now  be  found,  this  means  that  the  race  has  ceased  to  exist.  A race  does 
not  migrate.  Men  migrate,  and  their  successive  generations  are  born  in  ever* 
changing  landscapes;  but  the  landscape  exercises  a secret  force  upon  the  plant- 
nature  in  them,  and  eventually  the  race-expression  is  completely  transformed  by 
the  extinction  of  the  old  and  the  appearance  of  a new  one;  Englishmen  and 
Germans  did  not  migrate  to  America,  but  human  beings  migrated  thither 
Englishmen  and  Germans,  and  their  descendants  are  there  Americans.  It 
has  long  been  obvious  that  the  soil  of  the  Indians  has  made  its  mark  upon  them 

— generation  by  generation. they  become  more  and  more  like  the  people  they 
eradicated.  Gould  and  Baxter  have  shown  that  Whites  of  all  races,  Indians, 
and  Negroes  have  come  to  the  same  average  in  size  of  body  and  time  of  maturity 

— and  that  so  rapidly  that  Irish  immigrants,  arriving  young  and  developing 
very  slowly,  come  under  this  power  of  the  landscape  within  the  same  generation. 
Boas  has  shown  that  the  American-born  children  of  long-headed  Sicilian  and 
short-headed  German  Jews  at  once  conform  to  the  same  head-type.  This  is  not  a 
special  case,  but  a general  phenomenon,  and  it  should  serve  to  make  us  very 
cautious  in  dealing  with  those  migrations  of  history  about  which  we  know 
nothing  more  than  some  names  of  vagrant  tribes  and  relics  of  languages  (e.g., 
Danai,  Etruscans,  Pelasgi,  Achasans,  and  Dorians).  As  to  the  race  of  these 
“peoples’*  we  can  conclude  nothing  whatever.  That  which  flowed  into  the 
lands  of  southern  Europe  under  the  diverse  names  of  Goths,  Lombards,  and 
Vandals  was  without  doubt  a race  in  itself.  But  already  by  Renaissance  times 
it  had  completely  grown  itself  into  the  root  characters  of  the  Provengal,  Cas- 
tilian, and  Tuscan  soil. 

Not  so  with  language.  The  home  of  a language  means  merely  the  accidental 
place  of  its  formation,  and  this  has  no  relation  to  its  inner  form.  Languages 
migrate  in  that  they  spread  by  carriage  from  tribe  to  tribe.  Above  all,  they 
are  capable  of  being,  and  are,  exchanged  — indeed,  in  studying  the  early  history 
of  races  we  need  not,  and  should  not,  feel  the  slightest  hesitation  about  postu- 
lating such  speech-changes.  It  is,  I repeat,  the  form-content  and  not  the 
speaking  of  a language  that  is  taken  over,  and  it  is  taken  over  (as  primitives 


,1X0 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

are  for  ever  taking, over  ornament-motives)  in  order  to  be  nsed  with  ,|)crfect 
suteness  as  elements  of  their  own  form-language.  In  early  times  the  fact  that  a 
people  has  shown  itself  the  stronger,  or  the  feeling  that  its  language  possesses 
superior  efficacy,  is  enough  to  induce  others  to  give  up  their  own  language  and 
,— with  gettuincly  religious  awe  — to  take  its  language  to  themselves.  Follow 
out  the  speech-changes  of  the  Normans,  whom  we  ,fin,d  in  Normandy,  England, 
Sicily,  and  Constantinople  with  different  languages  in  each  place,  and  ever 
ready  to  exchange  one  for  another.  Piety  towards  the  mother  tongue  - — the 
very  term  testifies  to  deep  ethical  forces,  and  accounts  for  the  bitterness  of 
our  ever-recurring  language-battles  — is  a trait  of  the  Late  Western  soul,  almost 
unknowable  for  the  men  of  other  Cultures  and  entirely  so  for  the  primitive. 
Unfortunately,  our  historians  not  only  are  sensible  of  this,  but  tacitly  extend 
it  as  a postulate  over  their  entire  field,  which  leads  to  a multitude  of  failacious 
conclusions  as  to  the  bearing  of  linguistic  discoveries  upon  the  fortunes  of 
peoples**  — think  of  the  reconstruction  of  the  “Dorian  migration,**  argued 
from  the  distribution  of  later  Greek  dialects.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to 
draw  conclusions  as  to  the  fortunes  of  the  race  side  of  peoples  from  mere  place- 
names,  personal  names,  inscriptions,  and  dialects.  Never  do  we  know  a prim^ 
whether  a folkname  stands  for  a language-body,  or  a race-part,  or  both,  or 
neither  — besides  which,  folk-names  themselves,  and  even  land-names,  have, 
as  such,  Destinies  of  their  own. 

n 

Of  all  expressions  of  race,  the  purest  is  the  House.  From  the  moment  when 
man,  becoming  sedentary,  ceases  to  be  content  with  mere  shelter  and  builds 
himself  a dwelling,  this  expression  makes  its  appearance  and  marks  off,  within 
the  race  “man**  (which  is  the  element  of  the  biological  world-picture  0 the 
human  races  of  world-history  proper,  which  are  streams  of  being  of  far  greater 
spiritual  significance.  The  prime  form  of  the  house  is  everywhere  a product  of 
feeling  and  of  growth,  never  at  all  of  knowledge.  Like  the  shell  of  the  nautilus, 
the  hive  of  the  bee,  the  nest  of  the  bird,  it  has  an  innate  self-evidentness,  and 
every  trait  of  original  custom  and  form  of  being,  of  marriage,  of  family  life,  and 
of  tribal  order  is  reflected  in  the  place  and  in  the  room-organization  of  parterre, 
hall,  wigwam,  atrium,  court,  chamber,  and  gynasceum.  One  need  only  compare 
the  lay-out  of  the  old  Saxon  and  that  of  the  Roman  house  to  feel  that  the  soul 
of  the  men  and  the  soul  of  the  house  were  in  each  case  identical. 

This  domain  art-history  ought  never  to  have  laid  its  hands  on.  It  was  an 
error  to  treat  the  building  of  the  dwelling-house  as  a branch  of  the  art  of  archi- 
tecture. It  is  a form  that  arises  in  the  obscure  courses  of  being  and  not  for  the 
eye  that  looks  for  forms  in  the  light;  no  room-scheme  of  the  boor’s  hovel  was 
ever  thought  out  by  an  architect  as  the  scheme  of  a cathedral  was  thought  out. 

^ See  p.  above. 


■ PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  ' x^I 

This  significant  frontier  line  has  escaped  the  observation  of  art-research  — 
although  Dehio  ^ in  one  place  remarks  that  the  old  German  wooden  house 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  later  great  architecture,  which  arose  quite  inde- 
pendently — and  the  result  has  been  a perpetual  perplexity  in  method,  of  which 
the  art-savant  is  sensible  enough,  but  which  he  cannot  understand.  His  science 
gathers,  indiscriminately  in  all  the  “ pre-* ’ and  " primitive’ ' periods,  all  sorts  of 
gear,  arms,  pottery,  fabrics,  funerary  monuments,  and  houses,  and  considers 
them  from  the  point  of  view  of  form  as  well  as  that  of  decoration;  and,  pro- 
ceeding thus  , it  is  not  until  he  comes  to  the  organic  history  of  painting,  sculpture, 
and  architecture  (i.e.,  the  self-contained  and  differentiated  arts)  that  he  finds 
himself  on  firm  ground.  But,  unknowing,  he  has  stepped  over  a frontier  be- 
tween two  worlds,  that  of  s^oxil-expression  and  that  of  visual  cxpctssion-language. 
The  house,  and  like  it  the  completely  unstudied  basic  (i.e.,  customary)  forms 
of  pots,  weapons,  clothing,  and  gear,  belong  to  the  Totem  side.  They  charac- 
terize, not  a taste,  but  a way  of  fighting,  of  dwelling,  of  working.  Every 
primitive  seat  is  the  offset  of  a racial  mode  of  body-posing,  every  jar-handle  an 
extension  of  the  supple  arm.  Domestic  painting  and  dressmaking,  the  garment 
as  ornament,  the  decoration  of  weapons  and  implements,  belong,  on  the  con- 
trary, to  the  Taboo  side  of  life,  and  indeed  for  primitive  man  the  patterns  and 
motives  on  these  things  possess  even  magical  properties.^  We  all  know  the 
Germanic  sword-blades  of  the  Migrations  with  their  Oriental  ornamentation, 
.1  and  the  Mycensean  strongholds  with  their  Minoan  artistry.  It  is  the  distinction 
between  blood  and  sense,  race  and  speech,  politics  and  religion. 

There  is,  in  fact,  as  yet  no  world-history  of  the  House  and  its  Races,  and 
to  give  us  such  a history  should  be  one  of  the  most  urgent  tasks  of  the  researcher. 
But  we  must  work  with  means  quite  other  than  those  of  art-histoty.  The 
peasant  dwelling  is,  as  compared  with  the  tempo  of  all  ^r/-history,  something 
constant  and  “ eternar*  like  the  peasant  himself.  It  stands  outside  the  Culture 
and  therefore  outside  the  higher  history  of  man;  it  recognizes  neither  the 
temporal  nor  the  spacial  limits  of  this  history  and  it  maintains  itself,  un- 
altered ideally,  throughout  all  the  changes  of  architecture,  which  it  witnesses, 
but  in  which  it  does  not  participate.  The  round  hut  of  ancient  Italy  is  still 
found  in  Imperial  times.®  The  form  of  the  Roman  rectangular  house,  the 
existence-mark  of  a second  race,  is  found  in  Pompeii  and  even  in  the  Imperial 
palaces.  Every  sort  of  ornament  and  style  was  borrowed  from  the  Orient,  but 
no  Roman  would  ever  think  of  imitating  the  Syrian  house, ^ any  more  than  the 

^ Gesch.  d.  Dmtsch.  Kunst  (1919),  pp.  14,  et  scq. 

^ This  practice  of  inscription  survives  till  deep  into  the  Civilization.  Even  in  1914  the  guns 
of  the  German  Army,  true  products  of  the  advanced  machine-shop  though  they  were,  carried  a Latin 
threat  to  the  foe.  From  the  magic  rune  of  the  blade  it  is  a step  to  the  motto  on  the  shield,  and 
then  to  the  motto  alone  as  unity-charm  of  the  regiment  or  the  Order.  — Tr. 

® W.  Altmann,  Du  ital.  'Rundhautm  Qn^^.. 

^ A striking  case  in  point  is  the  Roman  military  camp.  See  Vol.  I (English  edition),  p.  185, 
foot-note.  — Tr. 


THE' DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  : 

Hclicaistic  city-architect  tampered  with  the  megaton  form. of  Myccnas  and 
Tiryns  and  the  old.  Greek  peasant-house  described  by  'Gaicn.  The  Saxon  and,, 
Franconian  peasant-house  kept  its  essential  nucleus  unimpaired  right  from  the 
country  farm,  through  the  burgher-house  of  the  old  Free  CitieSj  up  to  the  pa- 
trician,buildings,  of  the  eighteenth  century,  while  Gothic,  Renaissance,  Baroque, 
and  Empire  styles  glided  over  it  one  after  the  other,  clothing  it  from  cellar  to, 
garret  with  their  essences,  but  never  perverting  the  Soul  of  the  House.  And 
the  same  is  true  of  the  furniture-forms,  in  which  we  have  to  distinguish  care- 
fully the  psychological  from  the  artistic  treatment.  In  particular,  the  evolution 
of  the  Northern  seat-furniture  is,  right  up  to  the  club  arm-chair,  a piece  of  race- 
history  and  not  of  what  is  called  style-history.  Every  other  character  can 
deceive  us  as  to  the  fortunes  of  race  — the  Etruscan  names  amongst  the  “Sea- 
folk’*  defeated  by  Rameses  III,  the  enigmatic  inscription  of  Lemnos,  the  wall- 
paintings  in  the  tombs  of  Etruria,  afford  no  sure  evidences  of  the  bodily 
connexion  of  these  men.  Although  towards  the  end  of  the  Stone  Age  a telling 
ornamentation  arose  and  continued  in  the  vast  region  east  of  the  Carpathians, 
it  is  perfectly  possible  that  race  superseded  race  there.  If  we  possessed  in 
western  Europe  only  pottery  remains  for  the  centuries  between  Trojan 
and  Chlodwig,  we  should  not  have  the  least  inkling  of  the  event  that  we  know 
as  the  “great  Migrations.*'  But  the  presence  of  an  oval  house  in  the  iEgean 
region  ^ and  of  another  and  very  striking  example  of  it  in  Rhodesia,^  and  the 
much-discussed  concordance  of  the  Saxon  peasant-house  with  that  of  the  Lib- 
yan Kabyle  disclose  a piece  of  race-history.  Ornaments  spread  when  a people 
incorporates  them  in  its  form-language,  but  a house-type  is  only  transplanted 
along  with  its  race.  The  disappearance  of  an  ornament  means  no  more  than  a 
change  of  language,  hut  when  a house--ty  fe  vanishes  it  means  that  race  is  extinguished. 

It  follows  that  art-history,  besides  taking  care  to  begin  properly  with  the 
Culture,  must  not  neglect  even  in  its  course  to  separate  the  race  side  carefully 
from  the  language  proper.  At  the  outset  of  a Culture  two  well-defined  forms  of 
a higher  order  rise  up  over  the  peasant  village,  as  expressions  of  being  and 
language  of  waking-being.  They  are  the  castle  and  the  cathedral,^  In  them  the 
distinction  between  Totem  and  Taboo,  longing  and  fear,  blood  and  intellect, 
rises  to  a grand  symbolism.  The  ancient  Egyptian,  the  ancient  Chinese,  the 
Classical,  the  South- Arabian,  and  the  Western  castle  stands,  as  the  home  of 
continuing  generations,  very  near  to  the  peasant  cottage,  and  both,  as  copies 
of  the  realities  of  living,  breeding,  and  dying,  lie  outside  ail  art-history.  The 
history  of  the  German  Bur  gen  is  a piece  of  race-history  throughout.  On  them 
both,  early  ornament  does  indeed  venture  to  spread  itself,  beautifying  here 

Bulk,  Orchomenos,  pp.  et  scq.;  Noack,  Ovalhaus  tend  Palast  in  Kreta^  pp.  53,  e£  seq.  The 
house-plans  still  traceable  in  Latin  times  in  the ^^Sgean  and  Asia  Minor  may  perhaps  allow  us  to 
order  our  notions  of  human  conditions  in  the  prc-Glassical  period;  but  the  linguistic  remains,  never, 

^ Medieval  Phodesta  Qjond.on^ 

3a.ch.x. 


■ PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  ’ 1x3 

the  beams,  there  the  door,  and  there  again  the  staircase,  but  it  can  be  so,  or  so, 
at  choice,  or  omitted  altogether,  for  there  is  no  inward  bond  between  the 
structure  and  the  ornament.  The  cathedral,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  orna- 
mented, hut  is  ifself  ornament.  Its  history  is  coincident  with  that  of  the  Gothic 
Style,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  Doric  temple  and  all  other  Early  Culture 
buildings.  So  complete  is  the  congruence,  in  the  Western  and  every  other 
Culture  whose  art  we  know  at  all,  that  it  has  never  occurred  to  anyone  to  be 
astonished  at  the  fact  that  strict  architecture  (which  is  simply  the  highest 
form  of  pure  ornament)  is  entirely  confined  to  religious  building.  All  the 
beauty  of  architecture  that  there  is  in  Gelnhausen,  Goslar,  and  the  Wartburg 
has  been  taken  over  from  cathedral  art;  it  is  decoration  and  not  essence.  A 
castle  or  a sword  or  a pitcher  can  do  without  this  decoration  altogether  with-  • 
out  losing  its  meaning  or  even  its  form.^  But  in  a Cathedral,  or  an  Egyptian 
pyramid-temple,  such  a distinction  between  essence  and  art  is  simply  incon- 
ceivable. 

We  distinguish,  then,  the  building  that  has  a style  and  the  building  in  which 
men  have  a style.  Whereas  in  monastery  and  cathedral  it  is  the  stone  that  pos- 
sesses form  and  communicates  it  to  the  men  who  are  in  its  service,  in  farmhouse 
and  feudal  stronghold  it  is  the  full  strength  of  the  countryman’s  and  the  knight’s 
life  that  forms  the  building  forth  from  itself.  Here  the  man  and  not  the  stone 
comes  first,  and  here,  too,  there  is  an  ornamentation;  it  is  an  ornament  which 
is  proper  to  man  and  consists  in  the  strict  nature  and  stable  form  of  manners  and 
customs.  We  might  call  this  living,  as  distinct  from  rigid,  style.  But,  just  as 
the  power  of  this  living  form  lays  hands  on  the  priesthood  also,  creating  in 
Gothic  and  in  Vedic  times  the  type  of  the  knightly  priest,  so  the  Romanesque- 
Gothic  sacred  form-language  seizes  upon  everything  pertaining  to  this  secular 
life — costume,  arms,  rooms,  implements,  and  so  forth  — and  stylizes  their 
surface.  But  art-history  must  not  let  itself  lose  its  bearings  in  this  alien  world 
— it  is  only  the  surface. 

In  the  early  cities  it  is  the  same;  nothing  new  supervenes.  Amongst  the 
race-made  houses,  which  now  form  streets,  there  are  scattered  the  handful  of 
cult-buildings  that  have  style.  And,  as  having  it,  they  are  the  seats  of  art- 
history  and  the  sources  whence  its  forms  radiate  out  on  to  squares,  fagades, 
and  house-rooms.  Even  though  the  castle  develops  into  the  urban  palace  and 
patrician  residence,  and  the  palatium  and  the  men’s  hall,  into  guild-house 
and  town-hall,  one  and  all  they  receive  and  carry  a style,  they  do  not  have  it. 
True,  at  the  stage  of  real  burgherdom  the  metaphysical  creativeness  of  the 
early  religion  has  been  lost.  It  develops  the  ornament  further,  hut  not  the  build- 
ing  as  ornament.,  and  from  this  point  art-history  splits  up  into  the  histories  of 
the  separate  arts.  The  picture,  the  statue,  the  house,  become  particular  objects 

^ Though  magic  or  prestige  may  of  course  be  involved  in  their  ornamentation,  these  arc  super- 
vening and  not  radical  virtues.  — Tr. 


:ix4  : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

. to  which' the  style  is  to  be  applied.  Eves  the  church  itself  is  aow  s'uch,  a house,' 
A .Gothic  .cathedral  is  ornament^  but  a Baroque  hall-chiirc.h  is  a building  clothed 
with  ornament.  The  process  begun  in  the  Ionic  style  and  the  sixteenth  century  is 
completed  in  the  Corinthian  and  Rococo,  wherein  the  house  and  its  ornament 
are  separated . for  good  and  ail,  so  completely  .that  even  the  master-works, 
■amongst ' eighteenth-century  churches  and  monasteries  cannot  mislead  us — 
:.we  know  that'  all  this  art  of  theirs  is  secular,  is  adornment.  With  Empire 
the  style  transforms  itself  into  a ‘‘taste,*’  and  with  the  end  of  this  mode  archi- 
tecture turns  into  a craft-art.  And  that  is  the  end  of  the  ornamental  expression- 
language,  and  of  art-history  with  it.  But  the  peasant-house,  with  its  unaltered 
race-form,  lives  on. 

Ill 

The  practical  importance  of  the  house  as  race-expression  begins  to  be  ap- 
preciated as  and  when  one  realizes  the  immense  difSculty  of  approaching  the 
kernel  of  race.  I do  not  refer  to  its  inner  essence,  its  soul  — as  to  that,  feeling 
speaks  to  us  clearly  enough  and  we  all  know  a man  of  race,  a “thoroughbred,** 
when  we  see  one.  But  what  are  the  hall-marks  for  our  sense,  and  above  all 
for  our  eye,  by  which  we  recognize  and  distinguish  races?  This  is  a matter 
that  belongs  to  the  domain  of  Physiognomic  just  as  surely  as  the  classification 
of  tongues  belongs  to  that  of  Systematic.  But  how  immense  and  how  varied 
the  material  that  would  be  required!  How  much  of  it  is  irretrievably  lost  by 
destruction,  and  how  much  more  by  corruption ! In  the  most  favourable  cases, 
what  we  have  of  prehistoric  men  is  their  skeletons,  and  how  much  does  a 
skeleton  na  tell  us!  Very  nearly  everything.  Prehistoric  research  in  its  naive 
zeal  is  ready  to  deduce  the  incredible  from  a jaw-bone  or  an  arm-bone.  But 
think  of  one  of  those  mass-graves  of  the  War  in  northern  France,  in  which  we 
know  that  men  of  all  races,  white  and  coloured,  peasants  and  townsmen,  youths 
and  men  lie  together.  If  the  future  had  no  collateral  evidence  as  to  their  na- 
ture, it  would  certainly  not  be  enlightened  by  anthropological  research.  In 
other  words,  immense  dramas  of  race  can  pass  over  a land  without  the  investi- 
gator of  its  grave-skeletons  obtaining  the  least  hint  of  the  fact.  It  is  the  living 
body  that  carries  nine-tenths  of  the  expression  — not  the  articulation  of  the 
parts,  but  their  articulate  motions;  not  the  bone  of  the  face,  but  its  mien. 
And,  for  that  matter,  how  much  potentially  interpretabie  race-expression  is 
actually  observed  even  by  the  keenest-sensed  contemporary?  How  much  we 
jail  to  see  and  to  hear ! What  is  it  for  which  — unlike  many  species  of  beasts 
— we  lack  a sense-organ? 

The  science  of  the  Darwinian  age  met  this  question  with  an  easy  assurance. 
How  superficial,  how  glib,  how  mechanistic  the  conception  with  which  it 
worked!  In  the  first  place,  this  conception  groups  an  aggregate  of  such  grossly 
palpable  characters  as  are  observable  in  the  anatomy  of  the  discoveries  — 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  1x5 

that  is,  characters  that  even  a corpse  displays.  As  to  observing  the  body  qua 
living  thing,  there  is  no  question  of  it.  Secondly,  it  investigates  only  those 
signs  which  very  little  perspicacity  is  needed  to  detect,  and  investigates  them 
only  in  so  far  as  they  are  measurable  and  countable.  The  microscope  and  not 
the  pulse-sense  determines.  When  language  is  used  as  a differentia,  it  is  to 
classify  races,  not  according  to  their  way  of  speaking,  but  according  to  the  gram- 
matical stmeture  of  the  speech,  which  is  just  anatomy  and  system  of  another 
sort.  No  one  as  yet  has  perceived  that  the  investigation  of  these  speech-races 
is  one  of  the  most  important  tasks  that  research  can  possibly  set  itself.  In  the 
actuality  of  daily  experience  we  all  know  perfectly  well  that  the  way  of 
speaking  is  one  of  the  most  distinctive  traits  in  present-day  man  — examples 
are  legion;  each  of  us  knows  any  number  of  them.  In  Alexandria  the  same 
Greek  was  spoken  in  the  most  dissimilar  race-modes,  as  we  can  see  even  to-day 
from  the  script  of  the  texts.  In  North  America  the  native-born  speak  exactly 
alike,  whether  in  English,  in  German,  or  for  that  matter  in  Indian.  What  in 
the  speech  of  East-European  Jews  is  a race-trait  of  the  land,  and  present  there- 
forc^n  Russian  also,  and  what  is  a race-trait  of  the  blood  common  to  all  Jews, 
independent  of  their  habitat  and  their  hosts,  in  their  speaking  of  any  of  the 
European  '‘mother ’’-tongues?  What  in  detail  are  the  relations  of  the  sound- 
formations,  the  accentuations,  the  placing  of  words? 

But  science  has  completely  failed  to  note  that  race  is  not  the  same  for  rooted 
plants  as  it  is  for  mobile  animals,  that  with  the  microcosmic  side  of  life  a 
fresh  group  of  characters  appears,  and  that  for  the  animal  world  it  is  decisive. 
Nor  again  has  it  perceived  that  a completely  different  significance  must  be  at- 
tached to  “races”  when  the  word  denotes  subdivisions  within  the  integral  race 
**Man,**  With  its  talk  of  adaptation  and  of  inheritance  it  sets  up  a soulless 
causal  concatenation  of  superficial  characters,  and  blots  out  the  fact  that  here 
the  blood  and  there  the  power  of  the  land  over  the  blood  are  expressing  them- 
selves — secrets  that  cannot  be  inspected  and  measured,  but  only  livingly  ex- 
perienced and  felt  from  eye  to  eye. 

Nor  are  the  scientists  at  one  as  to  the  relative  rank  of  these  superficial 
characters  amongst  themselves.  Blumenbach  classified  the  races  of  man  ac- 
cording to  skull-forms,  Friedrich  Muller  (as  a true  German)  by  hair  and  lan- 
guage-structure, Topinard  (as  a true  Frenchman)  by  skin-colour  and  shape  of 
nose,  and  Huxley  (as  a true  Englishman)  by,  so  to  say,  sport  characteristics. 
This  last  is  undoubtedly  in  itself  a very  suitable  criterion,  but  any  judge  of 
horses  would  tell  him  that  breed-characteristics  cannot  be  hit  off  by  scientific 
terminology.  These  “ descriptions”  of  races  are  without  exception  as  worthless 
as  the  descriptions  of  “wanted”  men  on  which  policemen  exercise  their  theoreti- 
cal knowledge  of  men. 

Obviously,  the  chaotic  in  the  total  expression  of  the  human  body  is  not  in 
the  least  realized.  Quite  apart  from  smell  (which  for  the  Chinese,  for  example. 


1x6,  , , THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ,, 

is  a,  most  characteristic  mark  of  race) 'and  sonnd  (the  sound  of  speech,,  song, 
and,"  above.' .a.li,  la.nghtcr,  • which  enables  us  accurately  to  sense  deep. differences 
inaccessible  to  scientific  method)  the  profusion  of  images  before,  the  eye  is  so 
embarrassingly  rich  in  details.,  cither  .actually  visible  or  sensible  to.  the  inner 
vision,  that  the  possibility  of  marshalling  them  under  a few  aspects  is  simply 
unthinkable.  And  all  these  sides  to  the  picture,  all  these  traits  composing  it, 
are  independent  of  one  another  and  have  each  their  individual  history.  There 
arc  cases  in  which  the  bony  structure  (and  particularly  the  skull-form)  com- 
pletely alter  without  the  expression  of  the  fleshy  parts  — i.e.,  the  face  — be- 
coming different.  The  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  same  family  may  ail  present 
almost  evetf  differentia  posited  by  Blumenbach,  Muller,  and  Huxley,  and  yet 
the  identity  of  their  living  race-expression  may  be  patent  to  anyone  who  looks 
at  them.  Still  more  frequent  is  similarity  of  bodily  build  accompanied  by 
thorough  diversity  of  living  expression  — I need  only  mention  the  immeasur- 
able difference  between  genuine  peasant-stock,  like  the  Frisians  or  the  Bretons, 
and  genuine  city-stock.^  But  besides  the  energy  of  the  blood  — which  coins 
the  same  living  features  (“ family’*  traits)  over  and  over  again  for  centuries  — 
and  the  power  of  the  soil  — evidenced  in  its  stamp  of  man  — there  is  that 
mysterious  cosmic  force  of  the  syntony  of  close  human  connexions.  What  is 
called  the  **  Vmehen'  of  a pregnant  woman  ^ is  only  a particular  and  not  very 
important  instance  of  the  workings  of  a very  deep  and  powerful  formative 
principle  inherent  in  all  that  is  of  the  race  side.  It  is  a matter  of  common 
observation  that  elderly  married  people  become  strangely  like  one  another, 
although  probably  Science  with  its  measuring  instruments  would  **  prove” 
the  exact  opposite.  It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  formative  power  of  this 
living  pulse,  this  strong  inward  feeling  for  the  perfection  of  one’s  own  type. 
The  feeling  for  race-beauty  — - so  opposite  to  the  conscious  taste  of  ripe  urbans 
for  intellectual-individual  traits  of  beauty  — is  immensely  strong  in  primitive 
men,  and  for  that  very  reason  never  emerges  into  their  consciousness.  But 
such  a feeling  is  race-forming.  It  undoubtedly  moulded  the  warrior-  and  hero- 
type  of  a nomad  tribe  more  and  more  definitely  on  am  bodily  ideal ^ so  that  it 
would  have  been  quite  unambiguous  to  speak  of  the  race-figure  of  Romans  or 
Ostrogoths.  The  same  is  true  of  any  ancient  nobility  — filled  with  a strong 
and  deep  sense  of  its  own  unity,  it  achieves  the  formation  of  a bodily  ideal. 
Comradeship  breeds  races.  French  noblesse  and  Prussian  Landadel  are  genuine 
race-denotations.  But  it  is  just  this,  too,  that  has  bred  the  types  of  the  Euro- 

^ In  this  connexion  it  ought  to  be  someone’s  business  to  undertake  physiognomic  studies  upon 
the  massy,  thoroughly  peasantish,  Roman  busts;  the  portraits  of  Early  Gothic;  those  of  the  Re- 
naissance, already  visibly  urban;  and,  most  of  all,  the  polite  English  portraiture  from  the  latc- 
eighteenth  century  onward.  The  great  galleries  of  “ancestors”  contain  an  endless  wealth  of 
material. 

2 The  sudden  fear  of  some  animal  or  object  seen,  believed  to  result  in  her  child’s  bearing  the  mark 
of  it.  Cf.  Jacob  and  the  speckled  cattle  (Genesis  xxx,  37).  The  attitude  of  biologists  to  this 
question  is  not  negative,  but  non-committal.  — Tr. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  117 

pean  Jew,  with  his  immeiise  face-energy  and  his  thousand  years  of  ghetto  life; 
and  it  always  will  forge  a population  into  a race  whenever  it  has  stood  for  long 
together  spiritually  firm  and  united  in  the  presence  of  its  Destiny*  Where  a 
race-ideal  exists,  as  it  does,  supremely,  in  the  Early  period  of  the  Culture  — 
the  Vedic,  the  Homeric,  the  knightly  times  of  the  Hohenstaufen  — - the  yearn- 
ing of  a ruling  class  towards  this  ideal,  its  will  to  be  just  so  and  not  otherwise, 
operates  (quite  independently  of  the  choosing  of  wives)  towards  actualizing 
this  ideal  and  eventually  achieves  it.  Further,  there  is  a statistical  aspect  of  the 
matter  which  has  received  far  less  attention  than  it  should.  For  every  human 
being  alive  to-day  there  were  a million  ancestors  even  in  a.d.  1300  and  ten 
million  in  A.D.  1000.  This  means  that  every  German  now  living,  without 
exception,  is  a blood-relative  of  every  European  of  the  age  of  the  Crusades 
and  that  the  relationship  becomes  a hundred  and  a thousand  times  more  in- 
tensely close  as  we  narrow  the  limits  of  its  field,  so  that  within  twenty  genera- 
tions or  less  the  population  of  a land  grows  togQthtt  into  one  single  family; 
and  this,  together  with  the  choice  and  voice  of  the  blood  that  courses  through 
the  generations,  ever  driving  congeners  into  one  another’s  arms,  dissolving  and 
breaking  marriages,  evading  or  forcing  all  obstacles  of  custom,  leads  to  in- 
numerable procreations  that  in  utter  unconsciousness  fulfil  tho  will  of  the  race. 

Primarily,  this  applies  to  the  vegetal  race-traits,  the  “physiognomy  of 
position,*’  as  apart  from  movement  of  the  mobile  — i.e.,  everything  which 
does  not  differ  in  the  living  and  in  the  dead  animal-body  and  cannot  but  ex- 
press itself  even  in  stiiffened  members.  There  is  undoubtedly  something  cog- 
nate in  the  growth  of  an  ilex  or  a Lombardy  poplar  and  that  of  a man  — 
“thickset,”  “slim,”  “drooping,”  and  so  forth.  Similarly,  the  outline  of 
the  back  of  a dromedary,  or  the  striping  of  a tiger-  or  zebra-skin  is  a vegetal 
race-mark.  And  so,  too,  are  the  motion-actions  of  nature  ufon  and  with  a creature 
— a birch-tree  or  a delicately  built  child,  which  both  sway  in  the  wind,  an 
oak  with  its  splintered  crown,  the  steady  circles  or  frightened  flutterings  of 
birds  in  the  storm,  all  belong  to  the  plant  side  of  race.  But  on  which  side  of 
the  line  do  such  characters  stand  when  blood  and  soil  contend  for  the  inner  form  of  the 
trans-planted'^  sfeciesy  human  or  animal?  And  how  much  of  the  constitution  of 
the  soul,  the  social  code,  the  house,  is  of  this  kind? 

It  is  quite  another  picture  that  presents  itself  when  we  attune  ourselves  to 
receive  the  impressions  of  the  purely  animal.  The  difference  between  plant- 
wise  being  and  animalwise  waking-being  (to  recall  what  has  been  said  earlier) 
is  such  that  we  are  here  concerned,  not  simply  with  waking-being  itself  and  its 
language,  but  with  the  combination  of  cosmic  and  microcosmic  to  form  a freely 
moving  body,  a microcosm  vis-d-vis  a macrocosm,  whose  independent  life- 
activity  possesses  an  expression  peculiar  to  itself,  which  makes  use  in  part  of 
the  organs  of  waking-consciousness  and  which  — as  the  corals  show — is 
mostly  lost  again  with  the  cessation  of  mobility. 


■ii8  ' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

If  the  race-expression  of  the  plant  consists  predoininantly  in  the  physi- 
ognomy of  position,  the  animal-expression  resides  in  a physiognomy  of  movemem 

— namely,  in  the  form  as  having  motion,  in  the  motion  itself,  and  in  the  set  of 
the  limbs  as  figuring  the  motion.  Of  this  race-expression  not  very  much  is 
revealed  in  the  sleeping  animal,  and  far  less-  still  in  the  dead  animal,  whose  parts 
the  scientist  explores;  we  have  practically  nothing  to  learn  now  about  the 
skeleton  of  the  vertebrate.  Hence  it  is  that  in  vertebrates  the  limbs  are  more 
expressive  than  the  bones.  Hence  it  is  that  the  limb-masses  are  the  true  seat  of 
expressiveness  in  contrast  to  the  ribs  and  skull-bones the  jaw  being  an 
exception  in  that  its  structure  discloses  the  character  of  the  animaFs  food, 
whereas  the  plant's  nutrition  is  a mere  process  of  nature.  Hence  it  is,  again,  that 
the  insect’s  skeleton,  which  clothes  its  body,  is  fuller  of  expression  than  the 
bird’s,  which  is  clothed  by  its  body.  It  is  pre-eminently  the  organs  of  the  outer 
sheath  that  more  and  more  forcefully  gather  the  race-expression  to  themselves 

— the  eye,  not  as  a thing  of  form  and  colour,  but  as  and  expressive 

visage;  the  mouth,  which  becomes  through  the  usage  of  speech  the  expression 
of  understanding;  and  the  head  (not  the  skull),  with  its  lineaments  formed  by 
the  flesh,  which  has  become  the  very  throne  of  the  non-vegetable  side  of  life. 
Consider  how,  on  the  one  hand,  we  breed  orchids  and  roses  and,  on  the  other, 
we  breed  horses  and  dogs  — and  would  like  human  beings  to  be  bred,  too. 
But  it  is  not,  I repeat,  the  mathematical  form  of  the  visible  parts,  but  ex- 
clusively the  expression  of  the  movement,  that  displays  this  physiognomy. 
When  we  seize  at  a glance  the  race-expression  of  a motionless  man,  it  is  because 
our  experienced  eye  sees  the  appropriate  motion  already  potentially  in  the 
limbs.  The  real  race-appearance  of  a bison,  a trout,  a golden  eagle,  is  not  to  be 
reproduced  by  any  reckoning  of  the  creature’s  plane  or  solid  dimensions;  and 
the  deep  attractiveness  that  they  possess  for  the  creative  artist  comes  precisely 
from  the  fact  that  the  secret  of  race  can  reveal  itself  in  the  picture  by  way  of  the 
soul  and  not  by  any  mere  imitation  of  the  visible.  One  has  to  see  and,  seeing^ 
to  feel  how  the  immense  energy  of  this  life  concentrates  upon  head  and  neck, 
how  it  speaks  in  the  bloodshot  eye,  in  the  short  compact  horn,  in  the  **  aqui- 
line’ ’ beak  and  profile  of  the  bird  of  prey  — to  mention  one  or  two  only  of  the 
innumerable  points  that  cannot  be  communicated  by  words  and  are  only  ex- 
pressible, by  me  for  you,  in  the  language  of  an  art. 

But  with  such  hall-marks  as  those  quoted,  characterizing  the  noblest  sorts 
of  animals,  we  come  very  near  to  the  concept  of  race  which  enables  us  to  per- 
ceive within  the  type  '‘mankind”  differences  of  a higher  sort  than  either  the 
vegetable  or  the  animal  — differences  that  are  spiritual  rather,  and  eo  ipso 
less  accessible  to  scientific  methods.  The  coarse  characters  of  the  skeletal 
structure  have  ceased  to  possess  independent  importance.  Already  Retzius 
(d.  i860)  had  put  an  end  to  the  belief  of  Blumenbach  that  race  and  skull- 
formation  are  coincident,  and  J.  Ranke  summarizes  his  tenets  in  these 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  1x9 

words:  ^ “What  in  point  of  variety  of  skull-formation  is  displayed  by  mankind 
in  general  is  displayed  also  on  the  smaller  scale  by  every  ttlhc  (Volksstamm) 
and  even  by  many  fair-sized  communities  — a union  of  the  different  skull-form? 
with  the  extremes  led  up  to  through  finely  graduated  intermediate  forms.’* 
No  one  would  deny  that  it  is  reasonable  to  seek  for  ideal  basic  forms,  but  the 
researcher  ought  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  these  are  ideals  and  that, 
for  all  the  objectivity  of  his  measurements,  it  is  his  taste  that  really  fixes  his 
limits  and  his  classification.  Much  more  important  than  any  attempts  to 
discover  an  ordering  principle  is  the  fact  that  within  the  unit  “ humanity  ” all 
these  forms  occur  and  have  occurred  from  the  earliest  ice-times,  that  they 
have  never  markedly  varied,  and  that  they  are  found  indiscriminately  even 
within  the  same  families.  The  one  certain  result  of  science  is  that  observed 
by  Ranke,  that  when  skull-forms  are  arranged  serially  with  respect  to  transi- 
tions, certain  averages  emerge  which  are  characteristic  not  of  “race,*’  but  of 
the  land. 

In  reality,  the  race-expression  of  a human  head  can  associate  itself  with 
any  conceivable  skull-form,  the  decisive  element  being  not  the  bone,  but  the 
flesh,  the  look,  the  play  of  feature.  Since  the  days  of  Romanticism  we  have 
spoken  of  an  “Indogermanic”  race.  But  is  there  such  a thing  as  an  Aryan  or 
a Semitic  skull?  Can  we  distinguish  Celtic  and  Frankish  skulls,  or  even  Boer 
and  Kaffir?  And  if  not,  what  may  not  the  earth  have  witnessed  in  the  way  of 
history  unknown  to  us,  for  which  not  the  slightest  evidences,  but  only  bones, 
remain!  How  unimportant  these  are  for  that  which  we  call  race  in  higher 
mankind  can  be  shown  by  a drastic  experiment.  Take  a set  of  men  with  every 
conceivable  race-difference,  and,  while  mentally  picturing  “race,”  observe 
them  in  an  X-ray  apparatus.  The  result  is  simply  comic.  As  soon  as  light  is 
let  through  it,  “race”  vanishes  suddenly  and  completely. 

It  cannot  be  too  often  repeated,  moreover,  that  the  little  that  is  really 
illustrative  in  skeletal  structure  is  a growth  of  the  landscape  and  never  a func- 
tion of  the  blood.  Elliot  Smith  in  Egypt  and  von  Luschen  in  Crete  have  ex- 
amined an  immense  material  yielded  by  graves  ranging  from  the  Stone  Age  to 
the  present  day.  From  the  “Sea-peoples”  of  the  middle  of  the  second  millen- 
nium B.c.  to  the  Arabs  and  the  Turks  one  human  stream  after  another  has  passed 
over  this  region,  but  the  average  bone-structure  has  remained  unaltered.  It 
would  be  true,  in  a measure,  to  say  that  “race”  has  travelled  as  flesh  over  the 
fixed  skeleton-form  of  the  land.^  The  Alpine  region  to-day  contains  “peoples” 

^ J.  Ranke,  Der  M&nsch  B!,  p.  105. 

2 This  suggestive  sentence  should,  of  course,  be  read  with  its  reservation.  The  cranial  evi- 
dences of  Crete  are  highly  illustrative  in  this  connexion;  they  would  not  indeed  be  trusted  by  a 
modem  historian  without  weighty  collateral  evidence,  but  here  this  evidence  exists.  Up  to  the 
latter  part  of  Middle  Mdnoan,  the  “long”  head  predominated  heavily,  not  only  from  the  outset, 
but  increasingly  as  the  Culture  rose,  until  it  included  two-thirds  of  the  whole,  intermediates  forming 
a quarter  and  “short”  heads  a mere  handful.  But  from  about  the  time  of  the  catastrophic  fall  oi 


130  : ^ OF  THE  WEST, 

of  the  most  diverse  origins  — Teuton,  Latin,  Slav  — and  we  need  only  glance 
backward  to  discover  Etruscans  and  Huns  there  also.  Tribe  follows  tribe. 
But  the  skeletal  structure  in  the  mankind  of  the  region  in  general  is  ever  the 
same,  and  only  on  the  edges,  towards  the  plains,  does  it  gradually  disappear 
in  favour  of  other  forms,  which  are  themselves  likewise  fixed.  As  to  race, 
therefore,  and  the  race-wanderings  of  primitive  men,  the  famous  finds  of  pre- 
historic bones,  Neanderthal  to  Aurignacian,  prove  nothing.  Apart  from  some 
conclusions  from  the  jaw-bone  as  to  the  kinds  of  food  eaten,  they  merely  indi- 
cate the  basic  land-form  that  is  found  there  to  this  day. 

Once  more,  it  is  the  mysterious  power  of  the  soil,  demonstrable  at  once  in 
every  living  being  as  soon  as  we  discover  a criterion  independent  of  the  heavy 
hand  of  the  Darwinian  age.  The  Romans  brought  the  vine  from  the  South  to 
the  Rhine,  and  there  it  has  certainly  not  visibly  — i.e.,  botanically  — changed. 
But  in  this  instance  '‘race*’  can  be  determined  in  other  ways.  There  is  a soil- 
born  difference  not  merely  between  Southern  and  Northern,  between  Rhine 
and  Moselle  wines,  but  even  between  the  products  of  every  different  site  on 
every  different  hill-side;  and  the  same  holds  good  for  every  other  high-grade 
vegetable  “race,”  such  as  tea  and  tobacco.  Aroma,  a genuine  growth  of  the 
country-side,  is  one  of  the  hall-marks  (all  the  more  significant  because  they 
cannot  be  measured)  of  true  race.  But  noble  races  of  men  are  differentiated  in 
just  the  same  intellectual  way  as  noble  wines.  There  is  a like  element,  only 
sensible  to  the  finest  perceptions,  a faint  aroma  in  every  form,  that  underneath 
all  higher  Culture  connects  the  Etruscans  and  the  Renaissance  in  Tuscany,^  and 
the  Sumerians,  the  Persians  of  500  b.c.,  and  the  Persians  of  Islam  on  the  Tigris. 

None  of  this  is  accessible  to  a science  that  measures  and  weighs.  It  exists 
for  the  feelings  — with  a plain  certainty  and  at  the  first  glance  — but  not 
for  the  savant’s  treatment.  And  the  conclusion  to  which  I come  is  that  Race, 
like  Time  and  Destiny,  is  a decisive  element  in  every  question  of  life,  something 
which  everyone  knows  clearly  and  definitely  so  long  as  he  does  not  try  to  set 
himself  to  comprehend  it  by  way  of  rational  — i.e,,  soulless  — dissection 
and  ordering.  Race,  Time,  and  Destiny  belong  together.  But  the  moment 
scientific  thought  approaches  them,  the  word  “Time”  acquires  the  significance 

Late  Minoan  II,  the  long  heads  fall  to  a startlingly  low  figure,  while  intermediates  account  for 
half,  ^d  short  heads  for  more  than  a third.  It  marks  the  end  of  Minoan  Civilization  and  the  com- 
ing of  the  Achxans.  But  just  as  the  Minoan  skull  held  its  own  throughout  the  Minoan  Age,  so 
now,  after  its  fall,  the  short  head  maintained  itself,  as  stated  in  the  text,  through  all  subsequent 
vicissitudes,  from  the  “Sea-peoples”  through  Roman,  Arab,  and  Turk,  to  this  day.  Thus  the  Cretan 
landscape  has  had  two  skull-types  successively;  but  the  change  from  one  to  the  other  occurred  in 
connexion  with  an  immense  cataclysm,  nothing  less  than  the  collapse  of  a Civilization.  The 
rough  deduction  that  seems  to  emerge  from  this  case  is  that  a great  Culture  holds  its  skull,  no 
doubt  in  the  course  of  its  striving  towards  ideal  physical  type  of  its  own  (see  p,  1x7),  but  that  where 
that  major  organism  does  not  exist,  the  skull  endures  as  the  land  endures  and  the  peasant  endures. 
This  applies  also  to  the  Alpine  region,  which  has  received  the  deposit  of  migrations,  but  has  never 
been  the  centre  of  a high  Culture.  — Tr. 

^ Cf.  D.  Randall-Macivcr,  The  Etruscans  (19x8),  Ch.  I.  — Tr, 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  , ■ ;'i3i 

of  a dimcGsion,  the  word  “Destiny"  that  of  causal  connexion,  while  Race, 
for  which  even  at  that  stage  of  scientific  askesiswe  still  retain  a very  sure  feeling, 
becomes  an  incomprehensible  chaos  of  unconnected  and  heterogeneous  char- 
acters that  (under  headings  of  land,  period,  culture,  stock)  interpenetrate 
without  end  and  without  law.  Some  adhere  toughly  and  permanently  to  a 
stock  and  are  transmissible;  others  glide  over  a population  like  mere  cloud- 
shadows;  and  many  are,  as  it  were,  daemons  of  the  land,  which  possess  everyone  • 
who  inhabits  it  for  as  long  as  he  stays  in  it.  Some  expel  one  another,  some 
seek  one  another.  A strict  classification  of  races  — the  ambition  of  all  ethnol- 
ogy — is  impossible.  The  attempt  is  foredoomed  from  the  start,  as  it  contra- 
dicts this  very  essence  of  the  racial,  and  every  systematic  lay-out  always  has 
been  and  will  be,  inevitably,  a falsification  and  misapprehension  of  the  nature  of 
its  subject.  Race,  in  contrast  to  speech,  is  unsystematic  through  and  through. 
In  the  last  resort  every  individual  man  and  every  individual  moment  of  his 
existence  have  their  own  race.  And  therefore  the  only  mode  of  approach  to  the 
Totem  side  is,  not  classification,  but  physiognomic  fact. 

IV 

He  who  would  penetrate  into  the  essence  of  language  should  begin  by 
putting  aside  all  the  philologist’s  apparatus  and  observe  how  a hunter  speaks 
to  his  dog.  The  dog  follows  the  outstretched  finger.  He  listens,  tense,  to 
the  sound  of  the  word,  but  shakes  his  head  — this  kind  of  man-speech  he  does 
not  understand.  Then  he  makes  one  or  two  sentences  to  indicate  iir  idea; 
he  stands  still  and  barks,  which  in  his  language  is  a sentence  containing  the 
question:  “Is  that  what  Master  means?"  Then,  still  in  dog  language,  he 
expresses  his  pleasure  at  finding  that  he  was  right.  In  just  the  same  way  two 
men  who  do  not  really  possess  a single  word  in  common  seek  to  understand 
one  another.  When  a country  parson  explains  something  to  a peasant-woman, 
he  looks  at  her  keenly,  and,  unconsciously,  he  puts  into  his  look  the  essence 
that  she  would  certainly  never  be  able  to  understand  from  a parsonic  mode  of 
expression.  The  locutions  of  to-day,  without  exception,  are  capable  of  com- 
prehension only  in  association  with  other  modes  of  speech  — adequate  by 
themselves  they  are  not,  and  never  have  been. 

If  the  dog,  now,  wants  something,  he  wags  his  tail;  impatient  of  Master’s 
stupidity  in  not  understanding  this-  perfectly  distinct  and  expressive  speech, 
he  adds  a vocal  expression  — he  barks  — and  finally  an  expression  of  attitude 
— he  mimes  or  makes  signs.  Here  the  man  is  the  obtuse  one  who  has  not  yet 
learned  to  talk. 

Finally  something  very  remarkable  happens.  When  the  dog  has  exhausted 
every  other  device  to  comprehend  the  various  speeches  of  his  master,  he  sud- 
denly plants  himself  squarely,  and  his  eye  bores  into  the  eye  of  the  human. 
Something  deeply  mysterious  is  happening  here  — the  immediate  contact 


I3X'  ' THE  DECLINE'OF  THE  WEST 

of  Ego  and  Tu.  The  Took  emancipates  from  the  limitations  of  waking-con- 
sciousness. Being  understands  itself  without  signs.  Here  the  dog  has  become 
3.  "judge'  o£  men,  looking  his  opposite  straight  in  the  eye  and  grasping, 
behind  the  speech,  the  speaker. 

Languages  of  these  kinds  we  habitually  use  without  being  conscious  of  the 
fact.  The  infant  speaks  long  before  it  has  learned  its  first  word,  and  the 
grown-up  talks  with  it  without  even  thinking  of  the  ordinary  meanings  of  the 
words  he  or  she  is  using  — that  is,  the  sound-forms  in  this  case  subserve  a lan- 
guage that  is  quite  other  than  that  of  words.  Such  languages  also  have  their 
groups  and  dialects;  they,  too,  can  be  learned,  mastered,  and  misunderstood, 
and  they  are  so  indispensable  to  us  that  verbal  language  would  mutiny  if  we 
were  to  attempt  to  make  it  do  all  the  work  without  assistance  from  tone-  and 
gesture-language.  Even  our  script,  which  is  verbal  language  for  the  eye,  would 
be  almost  incomprehensible  but  for  the  aid  that  it  gets  from  gesture-language  in 
the  form  of  punctuation. 

It  is  the  fundamental  mistake  of  linguistic  science  that  it  confuses  language 
in  general  with  human  word-language  — and  that  not  merely  theoretically, 
but  habitually  in  the  practical  conduct  of  all  its  investigations.  As  a result, 
it  has  remained  immensely  ignorant  of  the  vast  profusion  of  speech-modes 
of  different  kinds  that  are  in  common  use  amongst  beasts  and  men.  The  do- 
main of  speech,  taken  as  a whole,  is  far  wider,  and  verbal  speech,  with  its  inca- 
pacity to  stand  alone  (an  incapacity  not  wholly  shaken  off,  even  now)  has  really 
a much  more  modest  part  in  it,  than  its  students  have  observed.  As  to  the 
“origin  of  human  speech,*'  the  very  phrase  implies  a wrong  enunciation 
of  the  problem.  Verbal  speech— -for  that  is  what  is  meant  — never  had 
origins  at  all  in  the  sense  here  postulated.  It  is  not  primary,  and  it  is  not 
unitary.  The  vast  importance  to  which  it  has  attained,  since  a certain  stage  in 
man’s  history,  must  not  deceive  us  as  to  its  position  in  the  history  of  free- 
moving  entity.  An  investigation  into  speech  certainly  ought  not  to  begin 
with  man. 

But  the  idea  of  a beginning  for  animal  language,  too,  is  erroneous.  Speaking 
is  so  closely  bound  up  with  the  living  being  of  the  animal  (in  contradiction 
to  the  mere  being  of  the  plant)  that  not  even  unicellular  creatures  devoid  of  all 
sense-organs  can  be  conceived  of  as  speechless.  To  be  a microcosm  in  the 
macrocosm  is  one  and  the  same  thing  as  having  a power  to  communicate  oneself 
to  another.  To  speak  of  a beginning  of  speech  in  animal  history  is  meaningless. , 
For  that  microcosmic  existences  are  in  plurality  is  a matter  of  simple  self-evidence. 
To  speculate  on  other  possibilities  is  mere  waste  of  time.  Granted  that  Dar- 
winian fancies  about  an  original  generation  and  first  pairs  of  ancestors  belong 
with  the  Victorian  rearguard  and  should  be  left  there,  still  the  fact  remains 
that  swarms  also  are  awake  and  aware,  inwardly  and  livingly  sensible,  of  a 
“we,”  and  reaching  out  to  one  another  for  linkages  of  waking-consciousness. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  : ^133 

Wakiag-bei0g  is  activity  in  the  extended;  and,  further,  is  willed  activity. 
This  is  the  distinction  between  the  movements  of  a microcosm  and  the  me- 
chanical mobility  of  the  plant,  the  animal,  or  the  man  in  the  plant-state  •— 
i.e.,  asleep.  Consider  the  animal  activity  of  nutrition,  procreation,  defence, 
attack  — ^ one  side  of  it  regularly  consists  in  getting  into  touch  with  the  macro- 
cosm by  means  of  the  senses,  whether  it  be  the  undifferentiated  sensitivity  of 
the  unicellular  creature  or  the  vision  of  a highly  developed  eye  that  is  in  ques- 
tion. Here  there  is  a definite  will  to  receive  impression;  this  we  call  orientation. 
But,  besides,  there  exists  from  the  beginning  a will  to  produce  impression  in  the 
other  — what  we  call  expression  — and  with  that,  at  once,  we  have  speaking 
as  an-  activity  of  the  animal  waking-consciousness.  Since  then  nothing  fundamentally 
new  has  supervened.  The  world-languages  of  high  Civilizations  are  nothing 
but  exceedingly  refined  expositions  of  potentialities  that  were  all  implicitly 
contained  in  the  fact  of  willed  impressions  of  unicellular  creatures  upon  one 
another. 

But  the  foundations  of  this  fact  lie  in  the  primary  feeling  of  fear.  The  wak- 
ing-consciousness makes  a cleft  in  the  cosmic,  projects  a space  between  particu- 
lars, and  alienates  them.  To  feel  oneself  alone  is  one’s  first  impression  in  the 
daily  awakening,  and  hence  the  primitive  impulse  to  crowd  together  in 
the  midst  of  this  alien  world,  to  assure  oneself  sensibly  of  the  proximity  of  the 
other,  to  seek  a conscious  connexion  with  him.  The  “thou”  is  deliverance 
from  the  fear  of  the  being-alone.  The  discovery  of  the  Thou,  the  sense  of  another 
self  resolved  organically  and  spiritually  out  of  the  world  of  the  alien,  is  the 
grand  moment  in  the  early  history  of  the  animal.  Thereupon  animals  are. 
One  has  only  to  look  long  and  carefully  into  the  tiny  world  of  a water-droplet 
under  the  microscope  to  be  convinced  that  the  discovery  of  the  Thou,  and  with 
it  that  of  the  I has  been  taking  place  here  in  its  simplest  imaginable  form.  These 
tiny  creatures  know  not  only  the  Other,  but  also  the  Others;  they  possess  not 
merely  waking-consciousness  but  also  relations  of  waking-consciousness,  and 
therewith  not  only  expression,  but  the  elements  of  an  expression-j‘jf?^(?r^. 

It  is  well  to  recall  here  the  distinction  between  the  two  great  speech-groups. 
Expression-speech  treats  the  Other  as  witness,  and  aims  purely  at  effects  upon 
him,  while  communication-speech  regards  him  as  a collocutor  and  expects 
him  to  answer.  To  understand  means  to  receive  impressions  with  one’s  own 
feeling  of  their  significance,  and  it  is  on  this  that  the  effect  of  the  highest  form 
of  human  expression-speech,  art,  depends.^  To  come  to  an  understanding, 
to  hold  a conversation,  postulates  that  the  Other’s  feeling  of  significances  is 
the  same  as  one’s  own.  The  elementary  unit  of  an  expression-speech  before 
witnesses  is  called  the  Motive.  Command  of  the  motive  is  the  basis  of  all 

^ Art  is  fully  developed  in  the  animals.  So  far  as  man  can  get  at  it  by  way  of  analogy,  it  consists 
for  them  in  rhythmic  movement  (“dance")  and  sound-formation  (“song").  But  this  is  by  no 
means  the  limit  of  artistic  impression  on  the  animal  itseif. 


134  'THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

expression-technique.  On  the  other  hand,  the  impression  produced  for  the 
purpose  of  an  understanding  is  called  the  Sign,  and  is  the  elementary  unit  of  all 
communication-technique  — including,  therefore,  at  the  highest  level,  human 
speech. 

Of  the  extensiveness  of  both  these  speech-worlds  in  the  waking-conscious- 
ness of  man  we  to-day  can  scarcely  form  an  idea.  Expression-speech,  which 
appears  in  the  earliest  times  with  all  the  religious  seriousness  of  the  Taboo, 
includes  not  only  weighty  and  strict  ornanaent  — which  in  the  beginning 
coincides  completely  with  the  idea  of  art  and  makes  every  stiff,  inert  thing  into 
a vehicle  of  the  expression but  also  the  solemn  ceremonial  — ^ whose  web 
of  formulae  spreads  over  the  whole  of  public  life,  and  even  over  that  of  the 
family  ^ — and  the  language  of  costume,  which  is  contained  in  clothing, 
tattooing,  and  personal  adornment,  all  of  which  have  a unifotm  significance. 
The  investigators  of  the  nineteenth  century  vainly  attempted  to  trace  the  origin 
of  clothing  to  the  feeling  of  shame  or  to  utilitarian  motives.  It  is  in  fact  in- 
telligible only  as  the  means  of  an  expression-speech,  and  as  such  it  is  developed 
to  a grandiose  level  in  all  the  high  Civilizations,  including  our  own  of  to-day. 
We  need  only  think  of  the  dominant  part  played  by  the  “mode*'  in  our  whole 
public  life  and  doings,  the  regulation  attire  for  important  occasions,  the  nuances 
of  wear  for  this  and  that  social  function,  the  wedding-dress,  mourning;  of 
the  military  uniform,  the  priest’s  robes,  orders  and  decorations,  mitre  and 
tonsure,  periwig  and  queue,  powder,  rings,  styles  of  hairdressing;  of  all  the 
significant  displays  and  concealments  of  person,  the  costume  of  the  mandarin 
and  the  senator,  the  odalisque  and  the  nun;  of  the  court-state  of  Nero,  Saladin 
and  Montezuma  — not  to  mention  the  details  of  peasant  costumes,  the  lan- 
guage of  flowers,  colours,  and  precious  stones.  As  for  the  language  of  religion, 
it  is  superfluous  to  mention  it,  for  all  this  ir  religion. 

The  communication-languages,  in  which  every  kind  of  sense-impression 
that  it  is  possible  to  conceive  more  or  less  participates,  have  gradually  evolved 
(so  far  as  the  peoples  of  the  higher  Cultures  are  concerned)  three  outstanding 
signs  — picture,  sound,  and  gesture,  which  in  the  script-speech  of  the  Western 
Civilization  have  crystallized  into  a unit  of  letter,  word,  and  punctuation  mark. 

In  the  course  of  this  long  evolution  there  comes  about  at  the  last  tht  de- 
tachment of  sfeaking  from  speech.  Of  all  processes  in  the  history  of  language, 
none  has  a wider  bearing  than  this.  Originally  all  motives  and  signs  are  un- 
questionably the  product  of  the  moment  and  meant  only  for  a single  individual 
act  of  the  active  waking-consciousness.  Their  actual  and  their  felt  and  willed 
significances  are  one  and  the  same.  But  this  is  no  longer  so  when  a definite  stock 
of  signs  offers  itself  for  the  living  act  of  giving  the  sign,  for  with  that  not  only 

^ Jesus  says  to  the  Seventy  whom  he  is  sending  out  on  mission:  “And  salute  no  man  on  the 
way”  (Luke  x,  4).  The  ceremonial  of  greeting  on  the  l|igh-road  is  so  complicated  that  people  in 
a hurry  have  to  omit  it.  A.  Bertholet,  'Kulturgtschkhtt  Israels  (1919),  p.  i6z. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,.  TONGUES  * ' ,135 

is  the  activity  differentiated  from  its  means,  but  the  means  are  differentiated 
from  their  significance.  The  unity  of  the  two  not  only  ceases  to  be  a matter  of 
self-cvidcncc,  it  ceases  even  to  be  a possibility.  The  feeling  of  significance  is  a 
living  feeling  and,  like  everything  else  belonging  with  Time  and  Destiny, 
it  is  uniquely  occurring  and  non-recurring.  No  sign,  however  well  known 
and  habitually  used,  is  ever  repeated  with  exactly  the  same  connotation;  and 
hence  it  is  that  originally  no  sign  ever  recurred  in  the  same  form.  The  domain 
of  the  rigid  sign  is  unconditionally  one  of  things-become  of  the  pure  extended; 
it  is  not  an  organism^  but  a system,  which  possesses  its  own  causal  logic  and  brings 
the  irreconcilable  opposition  of  space  and  time,  intellect  and  mood,  also  into 
the  waking  connexions  of  two  beings. 

This  fixed  stock  of  signs  and  motives,  with  its  ostensibly  fixed  meanings, 
must  be  acquired  by  learning  and  practice  if  one  wishes  to  belong  to  the  com- 
munity of  waking-consciousness  with  which  it  is  associated.  The  necessary 
concomitant  of  speech  divorced  from  speaking  is  the  notion  of  the  school.  This  if  fully 
developed  in  the  higher  animals;  and  in  every  self-contained  religion,  every 
art,  every  society,  it  is  presupposed  as  the  background  of  the  believer,  the 
artist,  the  ** well-brought-up’’  human  being.  And  from  this  point  each  com- 
munity has  its  sharply  defined  frontier;  to  be  a member  one  must  know  its 
language  — i.e.,  its  articles  of  faith,  its  ethics,  its  rules.  In  counterpoint  and 
Catholicism  alike,  bliss  is  not  to  be  compassed  by  mere  feeling  and  goodwill. 
Culture  means  a hitherto  unimagined  intensification  of  the  depth  and  strictness 
of  the  form-language  in  every  department;  for  each  individual  belonging  to  it, 
it  consists  — as  his  personal  Culture,  religious,  ethical,  social,  artistic  — • in  a 
lifelong  process  of  education  and  mining  for  this  life.  And  consequently  in  all 
great  arts,  in  the  great  Churches,  mysteries  and  orders,  there  is  reached  such 
a command  of  form  as  astonishes  the  human  being  himself,  and  ends  by  break- 
ing itself  under  the  stress  of  its  own  exigences  — whereupon,  in  every  Culture 
alike,  there  is  set  up  (expressly  or  tacitly)  the  slogan  of  a “return  to  nature.” 
This  maestria  extends  also  to  verbal  language.  Side  by  side  with  the  social 
polish  of  the  period  of  the  Tyrannis  or  of  the  troubadours,  with  the  fugues  of 
Bach  and  the  vase-paintings  of  Exekias,^  we  have  the  art  of  Attic  oratory  and 
that  of  French  conversation,  both  presupposing,  like  any  other  art,  a strict 
and  carefully  matured  convention  and  a long  and  exacting  training  of  the 
individual. 

Metaphysically  the  significance  of  this  separating-off  of  a set  language  can 
hardly  be  over-estimated.  The  daily  practice  of  intercourse  in  settled  forms, 
and  the  command  of  the  entire  waking-consciousness  through  such  forms  — 
of  which  there  is  no  longer  a sensed  process  of  formation  ad  hoc,  but  which  arc 

^ Exekias  — represented  in  the  British  Museum  by  his  “Achilles  and  Penthcsilca*'  (Ency.  Brit., 
XI  ed.,  article  “Ceramics,”  Plate  I)  — stands  at  the  end  of  Black  Figure  as  the  master  of  the  possi- 
bilities of  refinement  in  it  — on  the  verge  of  the  style-change  to  Red  Figure,  yet  apart  from  it.  Se- 
bastian Bach  is  his  “contemporary.”  — Tr. 


136  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

just  siuiplf  there,  and  require  understanding  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word 
“—  lead  to  an  ever-sharper  distinction  between  understanding  and  feeling  within 
the  waking-consciousness.  An  incipient  language  is  felt  understandingly; 
the  practice  of  speaking  requires  one,  first,  to  feel  the  known  speech-medium 
and,  secondly,  to  understand  the  intention  put  into  it  on  this  occasion.  Con- 
sequently the  kernel  of  all  schooling  lies  in  the  acquisition  of  elements  of 
knowledge.  Every  Church  proclaims  unhesitatingly  that  not  feeling  but 
knowledge  leads  into  its  ways  of  salvation;  all  true  artistry  rests  on  the 
sure  knowledge  of  forms  that  the  individual  has  not  to  discover,  but  to  learn. 

Understanding’’  is  knowledge  conceived  of  as  a being.  It  is  that  which  is 
completely  alien  to  blood,  race,  time;  from  the  opposition  of  rigid  speech  to 
coursing  blood  and  developing  history  come  the  negative  ideals  of  the  absolute, 
the  eternal,  the  universally  valid  — the  ideals  of  Church  and  School. 

But  just  this,  in  the  last  analysis,  makes  languages  incomplete  and  leads  to 
the  eternal  contradiction  between  what  is  in  fact  spoken  and  what  was  willed 
or  meant  by  the  speaking.  We  might  indeed  say  that  lies  came  into  the  world 
with  the  separation  of  speech  from  speaking.  The  signs  are  fixed,  but  not  so 
their  meaning  — from  the  outset  we  feel  that  this  is  so,  then  we  know  it, 
and  finally  we  turn  our  knowledge  to  account.  It  is  an  old,  old,  experience 
that  when  one  wills  to  say  something,  the  words  “fail”  one  (versagen,  mis-say); 
that  one  does  not  “express  oneself  aright”  and  in  fact  says  something  other 
than  what  was  meant;  that  one  may  speak  accurately  and  be  understood 
inaccurately.  And  so  finally  we  get  to  the  art — which  is  widespread  even 
amongst  animals  (e.g.,  cats)  — of  “using  words  to  conceal  thoughts.”  One 
says  not  everything,  one  says  something  quite  different,  one  speaks  formally 
about  nothing,  one  talks  briskly  to  cover  the  fact  that  one  has  said  something. 
Or  one  imitates  the  speech  of  another.  The  red-backed  shrike  (Lanius  colhrio) 
imitates  the  strophes  of  small  song-birds  in  order  to  lure  them.  This  is  a well- 
known  hunter’s  dodge,  but  here  again  established  motives  and  signs  are  prec- 
edent for  it,  just  as  much  as  they  are  a condition  for  the  faking  in  antiques  or 
the  forgery  of  a signature.  And  all  these  traits,  met  with  in  attitude  and  mien 
as  in  handwriting  and  verbal  utterance,  reappear  in  the  language  of  every 
religion,  every  art,  every  society  — we  need  only  refer  to  the  ideas  expressed 
by  the  words  “hypocrite,”  “orthodox,”  “heretic,”  the  English  “cant,” 
the  secondary  senses  of  “diplomat,”  “Jesuit,”  “actor,”  the  masks  and  wari- 
nesses of  polite  society,  and  the  painting  of  to-day,  in  which  nothing  is  honest 
more  and  which  in  every  gallery  offers  the  eye  untruth  in  every  imaginable 
form.  * 

In  a language  that  one  stammers,  one  cannot  be  a diplomat.  But  in  the  real 
command  of  a language  there  is  the  danger  that  the  relation  between  the 
means  and  the  meaning  may  be  made  into  a new  means.  There  arises  an  in- 
tellectual art  of  flaying  with  expression,  practised  by  the  Alexandrines  and  the 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  ' : 137 

Romantics  — hj  TheocritES  and  Brentano  in  lyric  poetry,  by  Reger  in  music, 
■by  Kierkegaard  in  religion. 

Finally,  speech  and  truth  exclude  one  another d And  in  fact  this  is  just  what 
brings  up,  in  the  age  of  fixed  language,  the  typical  “judge  of  men,”  who  is 
all  race  and  knows  how  to  take  the  being  that  is  speaking.  To  look  a man 
keenly  in  the  eyes,  to  size  up  the  speaker  behind  the  stump  speech  or  the  philo- 
sophical discourse,  to  know  behind  the  prayer  the  heart,  and  behind  the  common 
good-tone  the  more  intimate  levels  of  social  importance  — and  that  instan- 
taneously, immediately,  and  with  the  self-evident  certainty  that  characterizes 
everything  cosmic  ■ — that  is  what  is  lacking  to  the  real  Taboo-man,  for  whom 
one  language  at  any  rate  carries  conviction.  A priest  who  is  also  a diplomat 
cannot  be  genuinely  a priest.  An  ethical  philosopher  of  the  Kant  stamp  is 
never  a “judge  of  men.** 

The  man  who  lies  in  his  verbal  utterances  betrays  himself,  without  observing 
it,  in  his  demeanour.  One  who  uses  demeanour  to  dissimulate  with  betrays 
himself  in  his  tone.  It  is  precisely  because  rigid  speech  separates  means  and 
intent  that  it  never  carries  it  off  with  the  keen  appraiser.  The  adept  reads 
between  the  lines  and  understands  a man  as  soon  as  he  sees  his  walk  or  his 
handwriting.  The  deeper  and  more  intimate  a spiritual  communion,  the  more 
readily  it  dispenses  with  signs  and  linkages  through  waking-consciousness. 
A real  comradeship  makes  itself  understood  with  few  words,  a real  faith  is 
silent  altogether.  The  purest  symbol  of  an  understanding  that  has  again  got 
beyond  language  is  the  old  peasant  couple  sitting  in  the  evening  in  front  of 
their  cottage  and  entertaining  one  another  without  a word’s  being  passed, 
each  knowing  what  the  other  is  thinking  and  feeling.  Words  would  only 
disturb  the  harmony.  From  such  a state  of  reciprocal  understanding  some- 
thing or  other  reaches  back,  far  beyond  the  collective  existence  of  the  higher 
animal-world,  deep  in  the  primeval  history  of  free-moving  life.  Here  deliver- 
ance from  the  waking-consciousness  is,  at  moments,  very  nearly  achieved. 

■ . V ■ 

Of  all  the  signs  that  have  come  to  be  fixed,  none  has  led  to  greater  conse- 
quences than  that  which  in  its  present  state  we  call  “word.”  It  belongs,  no 
doubt,  to  the  purely  human  history  of  speech,  but  nevertheless  the  idea,  or  at 
any  rate  the  conventional  idea,  of  an  “origin”  of  verbal  language  is  as  mean- 
ingless and  barren  as  that  of  a zero-point  for  speech  generally.  A precise 
beginning  is,  inconceivable  for  the  latter  because  it  is  compresent  with  and  con- 
tained in  the  essence  of  the  microcosm,  and  for  the  former  because  it  presup- 

^ “All  forms,  even  those  that  are  most  felt,  contain  an  element  of  untruth”  (Goethe).  In  sys- 
tematic philosophy  the  intent  of  the  thinker  coincides  neither  with  the  written  words  nor  with 
the  understanding  of  his  readers,  as  it  . consists  in  his  thinking  meanings  into  words  in  the  course 
of  using  the  words  themselves  (J.^  es  tin  Denhn  inWortbedeutungm  ist,  im  Verlauf  der  Darstellmg  mit 
skh  selbsi). 


138',  ':  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ■ 

poses  many  fully  developed  kinds  of  communication-speech  and  constitutes 
only  one  element  — though  in  the  end  the  dominant  element  of  a slow  and 
quiet  evolution.  It  is  a fundamental  error  in  all  theories  (however  diametrically 
opposed  to  each  other)  like  those  of  Wundt  and  of  Jespersen  ^ that  they  inves- 
tigate speaking  in  words  as  if  it  were  something  new  and  self-contained,  which 
inevitably  leads  them  into  a radically  false  psychology.  In  reality  verbal 
language  is  a very  late  phenomenon,  not  a young  shoot,  but  the  last  blossom 
borne  by  one  of  the  ramifications  of  the  parent  stem  of  all  vocal  speeches. 

In  actuality  a pure  word-speech  does  not  exist.  No  one  speaks  without 
employing,  in  addition  to  the  set  vocabulary,  quite  other  modes  of  speech, 
such  as  emphasis,  rhythm,  and  facial  play,  which  are  much  more  primary  than 
the  language  of  the  word,  and  with  which,  moreover,  it  has  become  completely 
intertwined.  It  is  highly  necessary,  therefore,  to  avoid  regarding  the  ensemble 
of  present-day  word-languages,  with  its  extreme  structural  intricacy,  as  an 
inner  unity  with  a homogeneous  history.  Every  word-language  known  to  us 
has  very  different  sides,  and  each  of  these  sides  has  its  own  Destiny  within  the 
history  of  the  whole.  There  is  not  one  sense-perception  that  would  be  wholly 
irrelevant  to  an  adequate  history  of  the  use  of  words.  Further,  we  must  dis- 
tinguish very  strictly  between  vocal  and  verbal  languages;  the  former  is 
familiar  even  to  the  simpler  genera  of  animals,  the  latter  is  in  certain  char- 
acters — individual  characters,  it  is  true,  but  all  the  more  significant  for  that 
— a radically  different  thing.  For  every  animal  voice-language,  further,  ex- 
pression-motives (a  roar  of  anger)  and  communication-signs  (a  cry  of  warning) 
can  be  clearly  distinguished,  and  doubtless  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  earliest 
words.  But  was  it,  then,  as  an  expression-  or  as  a communication-language 
that  verbal  ImgnsLgc  arose?  Was  it  in  quite  primitive  conditions,  independent, 
more  or  less,  of  any  and  every  visual  language  such  as  picture  and  gesture? 
To  such  questions  we  have  no  answer,  since  we  have  no  inkling  of  what  the 
pre-forms  of  the  “word,**  properly  so  called,  were.  Naive  indeed  is  the  phi- 
lology which  uses  what  we  of  to-day  call  '‘primitive”  languages  (in  reality, 
incomplete  pictures  of  very  late  language-conditions)  as  premisses  for  con- 
clusions as  to  the  origin  of  words  and  the  Word.  The  word  is  in  them  an 
already  established,  highly  developed,  and  self-evident  means  — i.e.,  precisely 
what  anything  “originally*'  is  not. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  sign  which  made  it  possible  for  the  future 
word-language  to  detach  itself  from  the  general  vocal  speech  of  the  animal  world 
was  that  which  I call  “name”  — a vocal  image  serving  to  denote  a Something 
in  the  world-around,  which  was  felt  as  a being,  and  by  the  act  of  naming 
became  a numen.^  It  is  unnecessary  to  speculate  as  to  how  the  first  names  came 

^ Jespersen  deduces  language  from  poesy,  dance,  and  particularly  courtship.  Progress  in  Lan- 
(1894),  p.  357. 

2 Sec  VoL  I,  p.  80.  — Tf. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES^  m 

to  be  — no  human  speech  accessible  to  us  at  this  time  of  day  gives  us  the  least 
point  d'appMi  here.  But,  contrary  to  the  view  of  modern  research,  I considef 
that  the  decisive  turn  came  not  from  a change  of  the  throat-formation  or  from 
a peculiarity  of  sound-formation  or  from  any  other  physiological  factor  —- 
if  any  such  changes  ever  took  place  at  all,  it  would  be  the  race  side  that  they 
would  affect  — not  even  an  increased  capacity  for  self-expression  by  existing 
means,  like,  say,  the  transition  from  word  to  sentence  (H.  Paul  0?  but  a profouTid 
spiritual  change.  With  the  Name  comes  a new  world-outlook.  And  if  speech 
in  general  is  the  child  of  fear,  of  the  unfathomable  terror  that  wells  up  when 
the  waking-consciousness  is  presented  with  the  facts,  that  impels  all  creatures 
together  in  the  longing  to  prove  each  other’s  reality  and  proximity — ^ then 
the  first  word,  the  Name,  is  a mighty  leap  upward.  The  Name  grazes  the 
meaning  of  consciousness  and  the  source  of  fear  alike.  The  world  is  not  merely 
existent,  a secret  is  felt  in  it.  Above  and  apart  from  the  more  ordinary  objects 
of  expression-  and  communication-language,  man  names  that  which  is  enigmatic. 
It  is  the  beast  that  knows  no  enigmas.  Man  cannot  think  too  solemnly, 
reverently,  of  this  first  name-giving.  It  was  not  well  always  to  speak  the  name, 
it  should  be  kept  secret,  a dangerous  power  dwelt  in  it.  With  the  name  the  step 
is  taken  from  the  everyday  physical  of  the  beast  to  the  metaphysical  of  man.  It  was 
the  greatest  turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  human  soul.  Our  epistemology 
is  accustomed  to  set  speech  and  thought  side  by  side,  and  it  is  quite  right,  if  we 
take  into  consideration  only  the  languages  that  are  still  accessible  at  the  present 
day.  But  I believe  that  we  can  go  much  deeper  than  this  and  say  that  with 
the  Name  religion  in  the  proper  sense,  definite  religion  in  the  midst  of  formless 
quasi-religious  awe,  came  into  being.  Religion  in  this  sense  means  religious 
thought.  It  is  the  new  conception  of  the  creative  understanding  emancipated 
from  sensation.  We  say,  in  a very  significant  idiom,  that  we  “reflect  on,*' 
“think  overf'  something.  With  the  understanding  of  things-named  the  for- 
mation of  a higher  world,  above  all  sensational  existence,  is  begun  — “higher” 
both  according  to  obvious  symbolism  and  in  reference  to  the  position  of  the 
head  which  man  guesses  (often  with  painful  distinctness)  to  be  the  home  of 
his  thoughts.  It  gives  to  the  primary  feeling  of  fear  both  an  object  and  a glimpse 
of  liberation.  On  this  religious  fiirst  thought  all  the  philosophical,  scholarly, 
scientific  thought  of  later  times  has  been  and  remains  dependent  for  its  very 
deepest  foundations. 

These  first  names  we  have  to  think  of  as  quite  separate  and  individual 
elements  in  the  stock  of  signs  of  a highly  developed  sound-  and  gesture-language, 
the  richness  of  which  we  can  no  longer  imagine,  since  these  other  means  have 
come  to  be  subordinate  to  the  word-languages,  and  their  further  developments 

^ Sentence-like  complexes  of  sound  are  known  also  to  the  dog.  When  the  Australian  dingo 
reverted  from  domestication  to  the  wild  state,  he  reverted  also  from  the  house-dog  s bark  to  the 
wolf’s  howl  — a phenomenon  that  indicates  a transition  to  very  much  simpler  sound-signs,  but 
has  nothing  to  do  with  ‘’words."  , 


140  THE  DECXINE  OF  THE  WEST 

have  been  in  dependent  connexion  therewith.^  One  thing,  however^  was  assared 
when  the  name  inaugurated  the  transformation  and  spiritualization  of  com* 
miinicatioQ“tcchniquc  — the  pfc*eminence  of  the  eye  over  the  other  sense- 
organs.  Man’s  awakencss  and  awareness  was  in  an  illeininarcd  space,  his 
depth*expcricnce  ® was  a radiation  outward  towards  light-soiirccs  and  light* 
resistances,  and  he  conceived  of  his  ego  as  a middle  point  in  the  light. 
** Visible’’  or  ’‘invisible*’  was  the  alternative  which  governed  the  state  of 
understanding  in  which  the  first  names  arose.  Were  the  first  numkM^  perhaps, 
things  of  the  light-world  that  were  felt,  heard,  observed  in  their  effects,  but  mt 
semi  No  doubt  the  group  of  names,  like  everything  else  that  marks  a turning- 
point  in  the  course  of  world-hapf^nings,  must  have  dcvclofrd  both  rapidly  and 
powerfully.  The  entire  light-world,  in  wXich  everything  possesses  the  proper- 
ties of  position  and  duration  in  space,  was  — in  the  midst  of  mXat  tensions  of 
.cause  and  effect,  thing  and  pro|«rty,  object  and  subject!  — very  soon  listed 
with  innumerable  names,  and  so  anchored  in  the  memory,  for  wXat  we  now 
call  “memory”  is  the  capacity  of  storing  for  the  understanding,  by  means 
.of  the  name,  the  named.  Over-  the.  realm,  of  understood  visuals  {Sthdings)  super- 
venes a more  intellectual  realm... of  namings,- which  shares  with  it  the  logical 
property  of  being  purely  extensive,  dispo^sed  in  polarity,  and  ruled  by  the  causa! 
principle.  All  word-types  like  cases  and  pronouns  and . prepositions  (mXsch 
arise,  of  course,. much  later)  have  a causal  or  local  meaning  in  respect  of  named 
units;  adjectives,  and. verbs  also,  have  frequently  co,mc  into  existence  in  pairs 
of  opposites;  often  (as  .in  the.  E’we  languages  of  West  Africa  investigated  by 
Westermann)  the  same  word  is  pronounced  low  or  high  to  denote  for  example 
great  and  small,  far  and  near,  passive- and. active.^  Later  these. relies  of  gesture- 
language  pass  completely  into  the  word-form/  as  we  sec  clearly,  for  example, 
in  the  Greek  jimphs  and  jaticp6s  and  the  ^^-sounds  of  Egyptian  designations  of 

The  gcsmfc-languagcs  of  to-day  0>ll>rfick,  Grsmdfrsgm  d.  Sprmkfmci^,^  pp.  49,  ti  scq.,  with 
tcfercace  to  the  work  of  Jorio  on  the  gestures  of  the  Heapolitam)  without  exception  presuppose 
word-language  and  are  completely  dependent  upon  its  intellectual  systettittism.  Examples:  the 
mimicry  of  the  actor,  and  the  language  which  the  American  Indians  have  formed  for  themselves 
for  the  purpose  of  mutually  understanding  one  another  in  spite  of  extreme  differences  and  fluidity 
in  the  verbi  language  of  the  various  tribes.  Wundt  (V Sikerp^^ehkgMf  I,  p.  111)  quotes  the  follow- 
mg  to  show  how  complicated  sentences  can  bs  handled  in  this  language:  “White  soldiers,  led  by 
an  officer  of  high  rank,  hut  little  mtciligcnce,  took  the  Mescalcro  Indians  prisoners.** 

See-VoL'I,'p.-'i7a.  — Tr. 

® The  ease  of  voice-differentiations  of  the  same  word  in  Chinese  is  not  analogous.  It  arose  only 
out  of  scholars*  work  in  the  later  phas«  of  the  Chinese  Civilization  as  understood  in  this  work. 
And  it  is  a mechanical  expedient  and  not  a structural  character  — i.c,,  it  lacks  the  mcncsoncd 

in  the  text.  Voice-management  distinguishes,  not  **great**  from  “small/*  but  **pig*’  from  **God/'* 
**  bamboo**  from  “ to  dwell/*  English  students  will  find  a clear  and  undcrstandabic  account  of  this 
and  other  Chinese  differential  devices  in  Karl|^en*s  little  book;  Smnd  md  Sjmbd  m Chimse  (English 
translation,  19x3),  — Tr. 

^ Possibly  connected  with  this  is  the  mphafk  maithsis  charactermng  msmy  of  out  proverbs  and 
everyday  idioms  — c.g,,  “up  hill  and  down  dale**  Q^pm'mmts  ef  **krgmf  krgak**X  meaning 

hardly  more  than  *‘ everywhere.**  — Tr. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  : 141 

soffcring.  It  is  the  form  of  thmking  m opposites  which,  starting, from  these 
antithetical  word-pairs,  constitutes  the  foundation  of  all  inorganic  logic, ..and 
turns  every  scientific  discovery  of  truths  into  a movement  of  conceptual,  con- 
traries, of  which  the  most  universal  instance  is  that  of  an  old  view  and  a new 
one  being  contrasted  as  “error**  and  “truth.** 

The  second  great  turning-point  was  the  use  .of  grammar.  Besides  the,n,ame 
there  was  now  the  sentence,  besides  the  verbal  desigaation  the  verbal  relation,  ; 
and  thereupon  reflection.  — which  is  a thinking  in  word-relations  that  fol-, 
lows  from  the  perception  of  things  for  which  word-labels  exist  — became  the' 
decisive  characteristic  of  mao*s  waking-consciousness.  The  question  whether 
the  communication-languages  already  contained , effective  “sentences**  before 
the  appearance  of' the  genuine  “name**  is  a difficult  one.  The  sentence,  in  the 
present  acceptation  of  the  word,  has  indeed  developed  within  these  languages 
according  to  its  own  conditions  and  with  its  own  phases,  but  nevertheless  it 
postulates  the  prm  existence  of  the  name.  Sentences  as  conceptual  relations 
become  possible  only  with  the  intellectual  change  that  accompanied 
their  birth.  And  we  must  assume  further  that  within  the  highly  developed 
wordless  languages  one  character  or  trait  after  another,  in  the  course  of  con- 
tinuous practical  use,  w’-as  transformed  into  verbal  form  and  as  such  fell  into  its 
place  in  an  increasingly  solid  structure,  the  prime  form  of  our  present-day 
languages.  Thus  the  inner  build  of  all  verbal  languages  rests  upon  foundations 
of  far  older  construction,  and  for  its  further  development  is  mt  dependent  upon 
the  stock  of  words  and  its  destiny. 

It  is  in  fact  just  the  reverse.  For  with  syntax  the  original  group  of  individual 
names  was  transformed  into  a system  of  words,  whose  character  was  given,  not 
by  their  proper,  but  by  their  grammatical  significance.  The  name  made  its 
appearance  as  something  novel  and  entirely  self-contained.  But  word-species 
arose  as  elements  of  the  sentence,  and  thereafter  the  contents  of  waking-con- 
sciousness streamed  in  overflowing  profusion  into  this  world  of  words,  demand- 
ing to  be  labelled  and  represented  in  it,  until  finally  even  “all**  became,  in  one 
shape  or  another,  a word  and  available  for  the  thought-process. 

Thencefonvard  the  sentence  is  the  decisive  element  — we  speak  in  sentences 
and  not  words.  Attempts  to  define  the  two  have  been  frequent,  but  never 
successful.  According  to  F.  N.  Finck,  word-formation  is  an  analytical  and 
sentence-formation  a synthetical  activity  of  the  mind,  the  first  preceding  the 
second.  It  is  demonstrable  that  the  same  actuality  received  as  impression  is 
variously  understood,  and  words,  thorefore,  arc  definable  from  very  different 
points  of  view.^  But  according  to  the  usual  definition,  a sentence  is  the  verbal 
expression  of  a thought,  a symbol  H*  Paul)  for  the  connexion  of  several 
ideas  in  the  soul  of  the  speaker.  It  seems  to  me  quite  impossible  to  settle  the 
nature  of  the  sentence  from  its  contents.  The  fact  is  simply  that  we  call  the 
^ Die  Hauptty^m  des  Spachbaus,  1910. 


1.42-  '.THE  DECLINE.  OF  THE  WEST.-' 

relatively  largest  mechanical  units ■ employed  “ sentences* ' and  the  relatively 
smallest  ‘‘words.’*  Over  this  range  extends  the  validity  of  grammatical  iawi. 
But  as  soon  as  we  pass  from  theory  to  practice,  we  sec  that  language  as  cur- 
rently used  is  no  longer  such  a mechanism;  it  obeys  not  laws,  but  pMlse.  Thus 
a race-character  is  involved,  a pmri,  in  the  way  in  which  the  matter  to  be 
communicated  is  set  in  sentences.  Sentences  a.rc  not  the  same  for  Tacitus  and 
Napoleon  as  for  Cicero  .and  Nietasche.  The  Englishman  orders  his  material 
syntactically  in  a different  way  from-  the  Gerni.an.  Not  the  ideas  and  thoughts, 
but  fhe  thinking,  the  kind  of  Me,  f/je  hhod,  determine  in  the  primicivc,  Clas-; 
/sical,  Chinese,  and  Western  speech-communities  the  tyf^  of  the  sentence-unit, 
and  with  it  the  mechanical  relation  of- the  word  to  the  sentence.  The  boundary 
between  grammar  and  syntax  should  be  placed  at  the  point  where  the  mechan- 
ical of  speech  ceases  and  the  org.anic  of  sf^aking  begins  — usages,  custom,  the 
physiognomy  of  the  way  that  a man  employs  to  express  himself.  The  other 
boundary  lies  where  the  mechanical  structure  of  the  word  passes  into  the 
.organic  factors  of  sound-formation  .a-nd  expression.  Even  the  children  of  im- 
.migrants  can  often  be, recognized  by  the.  way  in  which  the  English  is 
pronounced  — a race-trait  of  the  land.  Only  that  which  lies  between  these 
limits  .is  the  “language,”  properly  so  called,  which  has  system,  is  a technical 
instrument,  and  can  be  invented,  improved,  changed,  and  worn  out;  enuncia- 
tion and  expression,  on  the  contrary,  adhere  to  the  race.  We  recognize  a person 
known  to  us,  without  seeing  him,  by  his  pronunciation,  and  not  only  that,  but 
we  can  recognize  a member  of  an  alien  race  even  if  he  speaks  perfectly  correct 
German.  The  great  sound-modifica-tions,  like  the  Old  High  German  in  Caro- 
lingian  times  and  the  Middle. High  German  in  the  Late  Gothic,  have  terri- 
torial frontiers  and  affect  only  the  sf^aking  of  the  language,  not  the  inner  form 
of  sentence  and  word. 

Words,  I have  just  said,  are  the  relatively  smallest  mechanical  units  in  the 
sentence.  There  is  probably  nothing  that  is  so  characteristic  of  the  thinking 
of  a human  species  as  the  way  in  which  these  units  arc  acquired  by  it.  For  the 
Bantu  Negro  a thing  that  he  sees  belongs  first  of  all  to  a very  large  number  of 
categories  of  comprehension.  Correspondingly  the  word  for  it  consists  of  a 
kernel  or  root  and  a number  of  monosyllabic  prefixes.  When  he  speaks  of  a 
woman  in  a field,  his  word  is  something -like  this:  “living,  one,  big,  old,  fc-^ 
male,  outside,  human';  this  makes  seven  syllables,  but  it  denotes  a single, 
clear-headed,  and  to  us  quite  alien  act  of  .comprehension.^  There  arc  languages 
in  which  the  word  is  almost  coextensive  with  the  sentence. 

The  gradual  replacement  of  bodily  or  sonic  by  ■ grammatical  gestures  is 
thus  the  decisive  factor  in  the  formation  of  sentences,  but  it  has  never  been 
completed.  There  are  no  purely  verbal  languages.  The  activity  of  speaking,  in 
words,  as  it  emerges  more  and  more  precise,  consists  in  this,  that  through  word- 
^ See  tke  article  “Bantu  Languages,*’  by  Sir  H.  H.  Johnston,  Enc^,  Brit.,  XI  ed,  — Tr, 


PEOPLES,,  races;  TONGUES  . ' ,;i43 

sounds  wc  awaken  significance-feelings,  .which  in  turn  through  „ the ' .sound  ol,' 
the  word-connexions  evoke  further  relatio.n-fccli.ngs.  Our  schooling  in  sjf)ecch 
trains  us  to  understand  in  this  abbreviated  and  indicative  form  not  only  light- 
things  and  light-relations,  but  also  tfaought-things  and  thought-relations. 
Words  arc  only  named,  not  used  definitively,  a.nd  the  hearer  has  to  feel  what .. 
the  speaker  means.  This  and.  this  alone  amounts  to  speech.,  and  hence  .mien 
and  tone  play  a much  greater  part  than  is  generally  a.d.mittcd  .in  the  under- 
standing of  modern  speech.  Substantive  signs  may  conceivably  exist  for  many 
of  the  animals  even,  but  verb-signs  never. 

The  last  grand  event  in  this  history,  which  brings  the  formation  of  verbal 
speech  more  or  less  to  a close,  is  the  coming  of  the  verb.  This  assumes  at  the 
outset  a very  high  order  of  abstraction.  For.  substantives  arc  words  whereby 
things  sense-defined  in  illuminated  space  ^ become  cvocable  also  in  after-thought, 
while  verbs  describe  types  of  change,  which  are  not  seen,  but  are  extracted  from 
the  unendingly  protean  light-worH,  by  noting  the  special  characters  of  the 
individual  cases,  and  generating  concepts  from  them.  “Falling  stone”  is 
originally  a unit  impression,  but  we  first  separate  movement  and  thing  moved 
and  then  isolate  falling  as  one  kind  of  movement  from  innumerable  other  sorts 
and  shades  thereof  — sinking,  tottering,  stumbling,  slipping.  We  do  not 
*‘see”  the  distinction,  wc  **know”  it.  The  difference  between  fleeing  and 
tunning,  or  between  flying  and  being  wafted,  altogether  transcends  the  visual 
impression  they  produce  and  is  only  apprehensible  by  a word- trained  conscious- 
ness. But  now,  with  this  verb-thinking,  even  life  itself  has  become  accessible 
to  reflection.  Out  of  the  living  impress  made  on  the  waking-consciousness, 
out  of  the  ambiance  of  the  becoming  (which  gesture-speech,  being  merely  imi- 
tative, leaves  unquestioned  and  unprobed)  that  which  is  life  itself  — namely, 
singularity  of  occurrence  — is  unconsciously  eliminated,  and  the  rest,  as  effect 
of  a cause  (the  wind  wafts,  lightning  flashes,  the  peasant  ploughs),  is  put,  under 
purely  extensive  descriptions,  into  suitable  places  in  the  sign-system.  One  has 
to  bury  oneself  completely  in  the  solid  definiteness  of  subject  and  predicate, 
active  and  passive,  present  and  perfect,  to  perceive  how  entirely  the  under- 
standing here  masters  the  senses  and  unsouls  actuality.  In  substantives  one 
can  still  regard  the  mental  thing  (the  idea)  as  a copy  of  the  visual  thing,  but 
in  the  verb  something  inorganic  has  been  put  in  place  of  something  organic.  The  fact 
that  we  live  — namely,  that  wc  at  this  instant  perceive  something  — becomes 
eventually  a property  of  the  something  perceived.  In  terms  of  word-thought, 
the  perceived  endures — ”is.”  Thus,  finally,  are  formed  the  categories  of 
thought,  graded  according  to  what  is  and  what  is  not  natural  to  it;  thus 
Time  appears  as  a dimension.  Destiny  as  a cause,  the  living  as  chemical  or 
psychical  mechanism.  It  is  in  this  wise  that  the  style  of  mathematical,  judicial, 
and  dogmatic  thought  arises. 

^ Even  cailing  something  '‘invisible*’  is  a definition  of  it  nodcr  the  light-aspcct. 


144  .the;  DECLINE  OF,  THE  WEST 

And  in  this  wise,  too,  arises  that  disnnitj  which  seems  to  us  inseparable 
from  the  essence  of  man,  but  is  really  only  the  expression  of  the  dominance  of 
word-language  in  his  waking-consciousness..  This  instrument  of  cornmiioica- 
tion  between  Ego  and  Tu  has,  by  reason  of  its  perfection,  fashioned  out  of  the 
animal  understanding  of  sensation,  a thinking-in-words  which  stands  proxy 
for  sensation.  Subtle  thinking  — ** splitting  hairs,**  as  it  is  called  — is  coii" 
versing  with  oneself  in  word-significances.  It  is  the  activity  that  no  kind  of 
language  but  the  language  of  words  can  subserve,  and  it  becomes,  with  the 
perfection  of  the  language,  distinctive  of  the  iife-habit  of  whole  classes  of 
human  beings.  The  divo,rce  of  speech,  rigid  and  devitalized,  from  speak- 
ing, which  makes  it  impossible  to  include  the  dvhole  truth  in  a verbal  ut- 
terance, has  particularly  far-reaching  consequences  in  the  sign-system  of  words. 
Abstract  thinking  consists  in  the  use  of  a finite  word-framework  into  which 
it  is  sought  to  squeeze  the  whole  infinite  content  of  life.  Concepts  kill  Being 
and  falsify  Waking-Being.  Long  ago  in  the  springtime  of  language-history, 
while  understanding  had  still  to  straggle  in  order  to  hold  its  own  with  sensa- 
tion, this  mechanization  was  without  importance  for  life.  But  now,  from 
a being  who  occasionaliy  thought,  man  has. become  a thinking  being,  and 
it  is,  the  ideal  of  every  thought-system'  to  subject  life,  once  and  for  all,  to  the 
domination  of  .intellect.  This  is  achieved  in.  theory  by  according  validity  only 
to  the  known  and  branding  the  actual  as  a sham  and  a delusion.  It  is  achicvcci 
in  practice  by  forcing  the  voices  of  the  blood  to  be  silent  in  the  presence  of 
universal  ethical  principles.^ 

Both,  logic  .and  ethics  alike,  are  systems  of  absolute  and  eternal  truths  for 
■ the  intellect,  and.  correspondingly  untruths  for  history.  However  completely 
the  inner  eye  may  triumph  over  the  outer  in  the  domain  of  thought,  in  the  realm 
of  facts  the  belief  in  eternal  truths  is  a petty  and  absurd  stage-play  that  exists 
• only  in  the  heads  of  individuals.  A true  system  of  thoughts  emphatically  can- 
not exist,  for  no  sign  can  replace  actuality.  Profound  and  honest  thinkers  arc 
always  brought  to  the  conclusion  that  all  cognition  is  conditioned  a priori  by 
its  own  form  and  can  never  reach  that  which  the  words  mean  — apart,  again, 
from  the  ease  of  technics,  in  which  the  concepts  arc  iostrumenrs  and  not  aims 
in  themselves.  And  this  ignorabimus  is  in  conformity  also  with  the  intuition 
of  every  true  sage,  that  abstract  principles  of  life  are  acceptable  only  as  figures 
of  speech,  trite  maxims  of  daily  use  underneath  which  life  flows,  as  it  has  always 
flowed,  onward.  Race,  in  the  end,  is  stronger  than  languages,  and  thus  it  is  that, 
under  all  the  great  names,  it  has  been  thinkers  — who  arc  |xrsoQalitics  — and 
not  systems  — which  arc  mutable  — ■ that  have  taken  effect  upon  life. 

^ Oaly  technics  arc  entirely  trac,  for  here  the  wcw’ds  arc  merely  the  key  to  actuality,  and  the 
sentences  arc  contimially  modified  nntil  they  are,  not  truth, but  actuaiity.  A hypothesis  claims, 
not  rightness,  but  usefulness. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES 


145 

VI 

So  far,  dien,  the  inner  history  of  word-languages  shows  three  stages.  . In 
the  first  there  appears,  within  h,ighly  developed  but  wordless  co.mmunicatioa-', 
languages,  the  first  names  — units  in  a new  sort  of  understanding.  ...The  world  , 
awakens  as  a seem,  and  religious  thought  begins.  In  the  second  stage,  a com-., 
picte  coiiimunication-sf^cch  is  gradually  tra.nsformcd  into  grammatical  values. 
The  gesture  becomes  the  sentence,  and  the  sentence  transforms  the  names,  into 
words.  Further,  the  sentence  becomes  the  great  school  of  understanding  pis- 
k-pis  sensation,  and  an  increasingly  subtle  significance-feeling  for  abstract 
relations  within  the  mechanism  of  the  sentence  evokes  an.  immense  .profusion 
of  inflexions,  which  attach  themselves  especially  to  the  substantive  and  the 
verb,  the  space- word  and  the  time-word.  This  is  the  blossoming  time  of 
grammar,  the  period  of  which  we  may  probably  (though  under  ail  reserves) 
take  as  the  two  millennia  preceding  the  birth  of  the  Egyptian  and  Babylonian 
Culture.  The  third  stage  is  marked  by  a rapid  decay  of  inflexions  and  a si- 
multaneous replacement  of  grammar  by  syntax.  The  intellectualization  of 
man’s  wmking-consciousness  has  now  proceeded  so  far  that  he  no  longer  needs 
the  sense-props  of  inflexion  and,  discarding  the  old  luxuriance  of  word-forms, 
communicates  freely  and  surely  by  means  of  the  faintest  nuances  of  idiom 
(particles,  position  of  words,  rhythm).  By  dint  of  speaking  in  words,  the 
understanding  has  attained  supremacy  over  the  waking-consciousness,  and 
to-day  it  is  in  process  of  liberating  itself  from  the  restrictions  of  sensible-verbal 
machinery  and  working  towards  pure  mechanics  of  the  intellect.  Minds  and 
not  senses  arc  making  the  contact.  . . . . 

In  this  third  stage  of  linguistic  history,  which  as  such  takes  place  in  the 
biological  plane  ^ and  therefore  belongs  to  man  as  a the  history  of  the  higher 
Cultures  now  intervenes  with  an  entirely  new  speech,  the  speech  of  the  distance 
— writing  — an  invention  of  such  inward  forcefulness  that  again  there  is  a sud- 
den decisive  turn  in  the  destinies  of  the  word-languages. 

The  written  language  of  Egypt  is  already  by  3000  in  a state  of  rapid  gram- 
matical decomposition;  likewise  the  Sumerian  literary  languages  called  erne-sal 
(women's  language).  The  written  language  of  China  — which  vis-h-vis  the 
vernaculars  of  the  Chinese  world  has  long  formed  a language  apart  — is,  even 
in  the  oldest  known  texts,  so  entirely  inflcxionless  that  only  recent  research  has 
established  that  it  ever  had  inflexions  at  all.®  The  Indogermanic  system 
is  known  to  us  only  in  a state  of  complete  break-down.  Of  the  Case  in  Old 
Vedic  (about  1500  b.c.)  the  Classical  languages  a thousand  years  later  retained 
only  fragments.®  From  Alexander  the  Great’s  time  the  dual  disappeared  from 

^ See  pp.  19,  ct  seq. 

^ The  English  reader  may  refer  to  Karigren*s  Simnd  and  Symbol  in  Chinese^  already  mentioned, 
fe)r  details. — Tr, 

® See  the  article  “ indo-Europcan  Languages/*  Bnty.  BriP,,  XI  cd.  — Tr. 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  , 

the  declension  of  ordinary  Hellenistic  Greek,  and  the  passive  vanished  from  the 
conjugation  entirely.  The  Western  languages,  although  of  the  most  miscel- 
laneous provenance  imaginable  — the  Germanic  from  primitive  and  the  Ro- 
manic from  highly  civilized  stock  ^ — modify  in  the  same  direction,  the  Romanic 
cases  having  become  reduced  to  one,  and  the  English,  after  the  Reformation, 
to  zero.  Ordinary  German  definitely  shed  the  genitive  at  the  beginning  of  the 
nineteenth  century  and  is  now  in  process  of  abolishing  the  dative.  Only  after 
trying  to  translate  a piece  of  difficult  and  pregnant  prose  — say  of  Tacitus  or 
Mommsen — “back”  ^ into  some  very  ancient  language  rich  in  inflexions 
does  one  realize  how  meantime  the  technique  of  signs  has  vaporized  into  a 
technique  of  thoughts,  which  now  only  needs  to  employ  the  signs  — abbrevi- 
ated, but  replete  with  meaning  — merely  as  the  counters  in  a game  that  only  the 
initiates  of  the  particular  speech-communion  understand.  This  is  why  to  a 
west-European,  the  sacred  Chinese  texts  must  always  be  in  the  fullest  sense  a 
sealed  book;  but  the  same  holds  good  also  for  the  primary  words  of  every 
other  Culture-language  — the  Greek  'kojos  and  apxv,  tke  Sanskrit  Atman  and 
Braman  — indications  of  the  world-outlook  of  their  respective  Cultures  that 
no  one  not  bred  in  the  Culture  can  comprehend. 

The  external  history  of  languages  is  as  good  as  lost  to  us  in  just  its  most 
important  parts.  Its  springtime  lies  deep  in  the  primitive  era,  in  which  (to 
repeat  what  has  been  said  earlier),  we  have  to  imagine  “humanity”  in  the 
form  of  scattered  and  quite  small  troops,  lost  in  the  wide  spaces  of  the  earth. 
A spiritual  change  came  when  reciprocal  contacts  became  habitual  (and  eventu- 
ally natural)  to  them,  but  correspondingly  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this 
contact  was  first  sought  for  and  then  regulated,  or  fended  off,  by  means  of  speech, 
and  that  it  was  the  impression  of  an  earth  filled  with  men  that  first  brought  the 
waking-consciousness  to  the  point  of  tense  intelligent  shrewdness,  forcing  verbal 
language  under  pressure  to  the  surface.  So  that,  perhaps,  the  birth  of  grammar 
is  connected  with  the  race  hall-mark  of  the  grand  Number. 

Since  then,  no  other  grammatical  system  has  ever  come  into  existence,  but 
only  novel  derivatives  of  what  was  already  there.  Of  these  authmtic 
languages  and  their  structure  and  sound  we  know  nothing.  As  far  as  our  back- 
ward look  takes  us,  we  see  only  complete  and  developed  linguistic  systems, 
used  by  everyone,  learned  by  every  child,  as  something  perfectly  natural.  And 
we  find  it  more  than  difficult  to  imagine  that  once  upon  a time  things  may  have 
been  different,  that  perhaps  a shudder  of  fear  accompanied  the  hearing  of  such 
strange  and  enigmatic  language  — an  awe  like  that  which  in  historic  times 
has  been  and  still  is  excited  by  script.  And  yet  we  have  to  reckon  with  the 
possibility  that  at  one  time,  in  a world  of  wordless  communication,  verbal 
language  constituted  an  aristocratic  privilege,  a jealously  preserved  class-secret. 
We  have  a thousand  examples  — the  diplomats  with  their  French,  the  scholars 

1 Translation,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  normally  from  older  into  younger  linguistic  conditions. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  ■ ■147 

with  their  Latin,  the  priests  with  their  Sanskrit  — to  suggest  that  there  may 
have  been  such  a /tendency.  It  is  part  of  the  thoroughbred’s  pride  to  be  able  to 
speak  to  one  another  in  a way  that  outsiders  cannot  understand  — ^ a language 
for  everybody  is  a vernacular.  To  be  “on  conversational  terms  with”  someone 
is  a privilege  or  a pretension.  So,  too,  the  use  of  literary  language  in  talking 
with  educated  people,  and  contempt  for  dialect,  mark  the  true  bourgeois  pride. 
It  is  only  we  who  live  in  a Civilization  wherein  it  is  just  as  normal  for  children 
to  learn  to  write  as  to  learn  to  walk  — in  all  earlier  Cultures  it  was  a rare 
accomplishment,  to  which  few  could  aspire.  And  I am  convinced  that  it  was 
just  so  once  with  verbal  language. 

The  tempo  of  linguistic  history  is  immensely  rapid;  here  a mere  century 
signifies  a great  deal.  I may  refer  again  to  the  gesture-language  of  the  North 
Indians,^  which  became  necessary  because  the  rapidity  of  changes  in  the  tribal 
dialects  made  intertribal  understanding  impossible  otherwise.  Compare,  too, 
the  Latin  of  the  recently  discovered  Forum  inscription  ^ (about  500)  with  the 
Latin  of  Plautus  (about  zoo)  and  this  again  with  the  Latin  of  Cicero  (about  50). 
If  we  assume  that  the  oldest  Vedic  texts  have  preserved  the  linguistic  state  of 
1100  B.c,,  then  even  that  of  zooo  may  have  differed  from  it  far  more  completely 
than  any  Indogermanic  philologists  working  by  a posteriori  methods  can  even 
surmise.®  But  allegro  changes  to  lento  in  the  moment  when  script,  the  language 
of  duration,  intervenes  and  ties  down  and  immobilizes  the  systems  at  entirely 
different  age-levels.  This  is  what  makes  this  evolution  so  opaque  to  research; 
all  that  we  possess  is  remains  of  written  languages.  Of  the  Egyptian  and  Baby- 
lonian linguistic  world  we  do  possess  originals  from  as  far  back  as  3000,  but  the 
oldest  Indogermanic  relics  are  copies^  of  which  the  linguistic  state  is  much 
younger  than  the  contents. 

Very  various,  under  all  these  determinants,  have  been  the  destinies  of  the 
different  grammars  and  vocabularies.  The  first  attaches  to  the  intellect,  the 
second  to  things  and  places.  Only  grammatical  systems  are  subject  to  natural 
inward  change.  The  use  of  words,  on  the  contrary,  psychologically  pre- 
supposes that,  although  the  expression  may  change,  inner  mechanical  structure 
is  maintained  (and  all  the  more  firmly)  as  being  the  basis  on  which  denomi- 
nation essentially  rests . The  great  linguistic  families  are  purely  grammatical  families . 
The  words  in  them  are  more  or  less  homeless  and  wander  from  one  to  another. 
It  is  a fundamental  error  in  philological  (especially  Indogermanic)  research 
that  grammar  and  vocabulary  are  treated  as  a unit.  All  specialist  vocabularies 
— the  jargon  of  hunter,  soldier,  sportsiiian,  seaman,  savant  — are  in  reality 
only  stocks  of  words,  and  can  be  used  within  any  and  every  grammatical  system. 
The  semi-Classical  vocabulary  of  chemistry,  the  French  of  diplomacy,  and  the 

^ See  p.  140  above.  — Tr, 

2 See  Ency.  BriP„  XL  ed.,  Vol.  XVI,  p.  — Tr. 

® See  the  articles  “Sanskrit”  and  “Indo-European Languages,”  Ency.  Brit.,  XI cd  — Tr. 


148^  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

English  of  the  racecourse  have  become  naturalized  in  ail  modern  languages 
alike.  We  may  talk  of  " alien”  words,  but  the  same  could  have  been  said  at 
some  time  or  other  of  most  of  the  "roots,”  so-called,  in  all  the  old  languages. 
Ail  names  adhere  to  the  things  that  they  denote,  and  share  their  history.  In 
Greek  the  names  for  metals  are  of  alien  provenance;  words  like  rai/pos, 
otw  are  Semitic.  Indian  numerals  are  found  in  the  Hittite  texts  of  Boghaz 
Keiii,^  and  the  contexts  in  which  they  occur  are  technical  expressions  which 
came  into  the  country  with  horse-breeding.  Latin  administrative  terms  in- 
vaded the  Greek  East,^  German  invaded  Petrine  Russia  in  multitudes,  Arabic 
words  permeate  the  vocabulary  of  Western  mathematics,  chemistry,  and  as- 
tronomy. The  Normans,  themselves  Germanic,  inundated  English  with  French 
words.  Banking,  in  German-speaking  regions,  is  full  of  Italian  expressions,^ 
and  similarly  and  to  a far  greater  extent  masses  of  designations  relating  to 
agriculture  and  cattle-breeding,  to  metals  and  weapons,  and  in  general  to  all 
transactions  of  handicraft,  barter,  and  intertribal  law,  must  have  migrated 
from  one  language  to  another,  just  as  geographical  nomenclature  always  passed 
into  the  proper  vocabulary  of  the  dominant  language,  with  the  result  that  Greek 
contains  numerous  Garian  and  German  Celtic  place-names.  It  is  no  exaggera- 
tion to  say  that  the  more  widely  an  Indogermanic  word  is  distributed,  the 
younger  it  is,  the  more  likely  it  is  to  be  an  "alien”  word.  It  is  precisely  the 
very  oldest  names  that  are  hoarded  as  private  possessions.  Latin  and  Greek 
have  only  quite  young  words  in  common.  Or  do  "telephone,”  "gas,”  "au- 
tomobile,” belong  to  the  word-stock  of  the  "primitive”  people?  Suppose,  for 
the  sake  of  argument  that  three-fourths  of  the  Aryan  "primitive”  words  came 
from  the  Egyptian  or  the  Babylonian  vocabularies  of  the  third  millennium;  we 
should  not  find  a trace  of  the  fact  in  Sanskrit  after  a thousand  years  of  unwritten 
development,  for  even  in  German  thousands  of  Latin  loan-words  have  long 
ago  become  completely  unrecognizable.  The  ending  "-ette”  in  "Henrictte” 
is  Etruscan  — how  many  genuine  Aryan  and  genuine  Semitic  endings,  not- 
withstanding their  thoroughly  alien  origin,  defy  us  to  prove  them  intruders? 
What  is  the  explanation  of  the  astounding  similarity  of  many  words  in  the 
Australian  and  the  Indogermanic  languages? 

The  Indogermanic  system  is  certainly  the  youngest,  and  therefore  the  most 
intellectual.  The  languages  derived  from  it  rule  the  earth  to-day,  but  did  it 
really  exist  at  all  in  xooo  as  a specific  grammatical  edifice?  As  is  well  known,  a 
single  initial  form  for  Aryan,  Semitic,  and  Hamitic  is  nowadays  assumed  as 
probable.  The  oldest  Indian  texts  preserve  the  linguistic  conditions  of  (prob- 
ably) before  ixoo,  the  oldest  Greek  those  of  (probably)  700.  But  Indian  per- 
sonal and  divine  names  occur  in  Syria  and  Palestine,^  simultaneously  with  the 

^ P.  Jensca,  Sit^.  Frems.  Akademte  (1919),  pp.  367,  et  seq. 

^ L.  Hahn,  Rom  und  Romanismus  im  griech~rom.  Osten  (1906). 

3 Sec  the  article  “Book-kcqsing*’  in  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 

^ Ed.  Meyer,  Qesch.  des  I,  §§  455,  465. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES'  ^ 149 

iiorse,  at  a mucli  later  date,  the  bearers  of  these  names  being  apparently  first 
soldiers  of  fortune  and  afterwards  potentates  d May  it  be  that  about  1600  these 
land-¥ikings,  these  first  — men  grown  up  inseparable  from  their  horses, 
the  terrifying  originals  of  the  Centaur-legend  — established  themselves 
more  or  less  everywhere  in  the  Northern  ^plains  as  adventurer-chiefs,  bring- 
ing with  them  the  speech  and  divinities  of  the  Indian  feudal  age?  And  the 
same  with  the  Aryan  aristocratic  ideals  of  breed  and  conduct.  According 
to  what  has  been  said  above  on  race,  this  would  explain  the  race-ideal  of  Aryan- 
speaking  regions  without  any  necessity  for  “migrations”  of  a “primitive” 
folk.  After  all,  it  was  in  this  way  that  the  knightly  Crusaders  founded  their 
states  in  the  East  — and  in  exactly  the  same  locality  as  the  heroes  with  Mi- 
tanni  names  had  done  so  twenty-five  hundred  years  before. 

Or  was  this  system  of  about  3000  merely  an  unimportant  dialect  of  a lan- 
guage that  is  lost?  The  Romanic  language-family  about  a.d.  1600  dominated 
all  the  seas.  About  400  b.c.  the  “original”  language  on  the  Tiber  possessed  a 
domain  of  little  more  than  a thousand  square  miles.  It  is  certain  that  the 
geographical  picture  of  the  grammatical  families  at  about  4000  was  still  very 
variegated.  The  Semitic-Hamitic-Aryan  group  Qif  it  ever  did  form  a unit) 
can  hardly  have  been  of  much  importance  at  that  time.  We  stumble  at  every 
turn  upon  the  relics  of  old  speech-families  — Etruscan,  Basque,  Sumerian, 
Ligurian,  the  ancient  tongues  of  Asia  Minor,  and  others  — that  in  their  day 
must  have  belonged  to  very  extensive  systems.  In  the  archives  of  Bogha^- 
Keiii  eight  new  languages  have  so  far  been  identified,  all  of  them  in  use  about  the 
year  1000.  With  the  then  prevailing  tempo  of  modification,  Aryan  may  in 
zooo  have  formed  a unit  with  languages  that  we  should  never  dream  of  asso- 
ciating with  it. 

VII 

Writing  is  an  entirely  new  kind  of  language,  and  implies  a complete  change 
in  the  relations  of  man’s  waking-consciousness,  in  that  it  liherates  it  from  the 
tyranny  of  the  present.  Picture-languages  which  portray  objects  are  far  older, 
older  probably  than  any  words;  but  here  the  picture  is  no  longer  an  immediate 
denotation  of  some  sight-object,  but  primarily  the  sign  of  a word  — i.e.,  some- 
thing already  abstract  from  sensation.  It  is  the  first  and  only  example  of  a lan- 
guage that  demands,  without  itself  providing,  the  necessary  preparatory  training. 

Script,  therefore,  presupposes  a fully  developed  grammar,  since  the  activity 
of  writing  and  reading  is  infinitely  more  abstract  than  that  of  speaking  and 
hearing.  Reading  consists  in  scanning  a script-image  with  a feeling  of  the  sig- 
nificances of  corresponding  word-sounds;  what  script  contains  is  not  signs  for  things, 
but  signs  for  other  signs.  The  grammatical  sense  must  be  enlarged  by  instan- 
taneous comprehension. 


^ See  below. 


150  THE  DECLINE  'OF  THE  WEST 

■ Tile  word  is  a possession  of  man  generally,  whereas  writing  belongs  ex- 
clusively to  Culture-men.  In  contrast  to  verbal  language  it  is  conditioned, 
not  merely  partially,  but  entirely,  by  the  political  and  religious  Destinies  of 
world-history.  All  scripts  come  into  being  in  the  individual  Cultures  and  are  to 
be  reckoned  amongst  their  profoundest  symbols.  But  hitherto  a comprehensive 
history  of  script  has  never  been  produced,  and  a psychology  of  its  forms  and 
their  modifications  has  never  even  been  attempted.  Writing  is  the  grand  symbol 
of  the  Ear,  meaning  not  only  extension-distance,  but  also,  and  above  all,  dura- 
tion and  future  and  the  will-to-eternity.  Speaking  and  listening  take  place  only 
in  proximity  and  the  present,^  but  through  script  one  speaks  to  men  whom  one 
has  never  seen,  who  may  not  even  have  been  born  yet;  the  voice  of  a man  is 
heard  centuries  after  he  has  passed  away.  It  is  one  of  the  first  distinguishing 
marks  of  the  historical  endowment.  But  for  that  very  reason  nothing  is  more 
characteristic  of  a Culture  than  its  inward  relation  to  writing.  If  we  know  as 
little  as  we  do  about  Indogermanic,  it  is  because  the  two  earliest  Cultures 
whose  people  made  use  of  this  system  — the  Indian  and  the  Classical  — were 
so  a-historic  in  disposition  that  they  not  only  formed  no  script  of  their  own, 
but  even  fought  off  alien  scripts  until  well  into  the  Late  period  of  their  course. 
Actually,  the  whole  art  of  Classical  prose  is  designed  immediately  for  the  ear. 
One  read  it  as  if  one  were  speaking,  whereas  we,  by  comparison,  speak  every- 
thing as  though  we  were  reading  it  — with  the  result  that  in  the  eternal  seesaw 
between  script-image  and  word-sound  we  have  never  attained  to  a prose  style 
that  is  perfect  in  the  Attic  sense.  In  the  Arabian  Culture,  on  the  other  hand, 
each  religion  developed  its  own  script  and  kept  it  even  through  changes  of 
verbal  language;  the  duration  of  the  sacred  books  tand  teachings  and  the 
script  as  symbol  of  duration  belong  together.  The  oldest  evidences  of  alpha- 
betical script  are  found  in  southern  Arabia  in  the  Minman  and  Sabacan  scripts  — - 
differentiated,  without  doubt,  according  to  sect  — which  probably  go  back  to 
the  tenth  century  before  Christ.^  The  Jews,  Mandxans,  and  Manichxans  in 
Babylonia  spoke  Eastern  Aramaic,  but  all  of  them  had  scripts  of  their  ov^n. 
From  the  Abbassid  period  onward  Arabic  ruled,  but  Christians  and  Jews  wrote 
it  in  their  own  characters.  ® Islam  spread  the  Arabic  script  universally  amongst 
its  adherents,  irrespective  of  whether  their  spoken  language  was  Semitic, 
Mongolian,  Aryan,  or  a Negro  tongue.^  The  growth  of  the  writing  habit 
brings  with  it,  everywhere  and  inevitably,  the  distinction  between  the  written 
and  the  colloquial  languages.  The.  written  language  brings  the  symbolism 

^ Radio  broadcasting  does  not  controvert  this.  Its  characteristic  quality  is  not  (as  is  often 
supposed)  dissemination  to  vast  numbers  irrespective  of  physical  distance,  but  a special  intimacy 
of  address  to  the  listening  individual.  — Tr. 

® See  the  article  “Semitic  Language,”  Brit,,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 

® Similarly  the  modern  Jews  of  the  Dispersion  write  Yiddish,  which  is  a modified  German, 
in  Hebrew  characters. — Tr, 

^ See  Lidzbarski,  Sit^,  Bsrl.  AkaL  (1916),  p ixi8.  There  is  plentiful  material  in  M.  Miese,  Die 
Qesetxp  der  Schriftgeschichte  (1919).  > 


PEOPLES,  R ACES,  TON  GUES  ; ^ ^ 

of  duration  to  bear  upon  its  .own.  grammatical  condition,  which'  itself  yields 
only  slowly  and  reluctantly  to  the  progressive  modifications  of  the  colloquial 
language  — the  latter,  therefore,  always  representing  at  any  given  moment  a' 
younger  condition.  There  is  not  one  Hellenic  KOLvr),  but  two/  and  the  im- 
mense distance  between  the  written  and  the  living  Latin  of  Imperial  times  iS' 
sufficiently  evidenced  in  the  structure  of  the  early  Romance  languages. ^ The 
older  a Civilization  becomes,  the  more  abrupt  is  the  distinction,  until  we  have 
the  gap  that  to-day  separates  written  Chinese  from  Kuan-hua,  the  spoken 
language  of  educated  North  Chinese  — a matter  no  longer  of  two  dialects  but 
of  two  reciprocally  alien  languages. 

Here,  it  should  be  observed,  we.  have  direct  expression  of  the  fact  that 
writing  is  above  everything  a matter  of  status,  and  more  particularly  an  ancient 
privilege  of  priesthood.  The  peasantry  is  without  history  and J^herefore  without 
writing.  But,  even  apart  from  this,  there  is  in  Race  an  unmistakable  antipathy 
to  script.  It  is,  I think,  a fact  of  the  highest  importance  to  graphology  that 
the  more  the  writer  has  race  (breed),  the  more  cavalierly  he  treats  the  orna- 
mental structure  of  the  letters,  and  the  more  ready  he  is  to  replace  this  by  per- 
sonal line-pictures.  Only  the  Taboo-man  evidences  a certain  respect  for  the 
proper  forms  of  the  letters  and  ever,  if  unconsciously,  tries  to  reproduce  them. 
It,,  is  the  distinction  between  the  man  of  action,  who  makes  history,  and  the 
scholar,  who  merely  puts  it  down  on  paper,  “eternalizes”  it.  In  all  Cultures 
the  script  is  in  the  keeping  of  the  priesthood,  in  which  class  we  have  to  count 
also  the  poet  and  the  scholars.  The  nobility  despises  writing;  it  has  people 
to  write  for  it.  From  the  remotest  times  this  activity  has  had  something 
intellectual-sacerdotal  about  it.  Timeless  truths  came  to  be  such,  not  at  all 
through  speech,  but  only  when  there  came  to  be  script  for  them.  It  is  the  oppo- 
sition of  castle  and  cathedral  over  again:  which  shall  endure,  deed  or  truth?  The 
archivist's  “ sources”  preserve  facts,  the  holy  scripture,  truths.  What  chronicles 
and  documents  mean  in  the  first-named,  exegesis  and  library  mean  in  the  second. 
And  thus  there  is  something  besides  cult-architecture  that  is  not  decorated 
with  ornament,  but  ir  ornament  ^ — the  book.  The  art-history  of  all  Cultural 
springtimes  ought  to  begin  with  the  script,  and  the  cursive  script  even  before 
the  monumental.  Here  we  can  observe  the  essence  of  the  Gothic  style,  or  of  the 
Magiaii,  at  its  purest.  No  other  ornament  possesses  the  inwardness  of  a letter- 
shape  or  a manuscript  page;  nowhere  else  is  arabesque  as  perfect  as  it  is  in  the 
Koran  texts  on  the  walls  of  a mosque.  And,  then,  the  great  art  of  initials,  the 
architecture  of  the  marginal  picture,  the  plastic  of  the  covers  1 In  a Koran  in 
the  Kufi  script  every  page  has  the  effect  of  a piece  of  tapestry.  A Gothic  book  of 
the  Gospels  is,  as  it  were,  a little  cathedral.  As  for  Classical  art,  it  is  very  sig- 

^ P.  Kretschmer,  in  Gercke-Norden,  Einl.  i,  d.  Altertumswissenschajt^  I,  p.  551. 

^ See  the  articles  “Romance  Languages’*  and  “Latin  Language,”  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 

^ Cf.  p.  IZ2.. 


I5X  ; : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

aificant  that  the  one  thing  that  it  did  not  beautify  with  its  touch  was  the 
script  and  the  book-roll  — an  exception  founded  in  its  steady  hatred  of  that 
which  endures,  the  contempt  for  a technique  which  insists  on  being  more  than 
a technique.  Neither  in  Hellas  nor  in  India  do  we  find  an  art  of  monumental 
inscription  as  in  Egypt.  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  anybody  that  a 
sheet  of  handwriting  of  Plato  was  a relic,  or  that  a fine  edition  of  the  dramas 
of  Sophocles  ought  to  be  treasured  up  in  the  Acropolis. 

As  the  city  lifted  up  its  head  over  the  countryside,  as  the  burgher  joined 
the  noble  and  the  priest  and  the  urban  spirit  aspired  to  supremacy,  writing, 
from  being  a herald  of  nobles’  fame  and  of  eternal  truths,  became  a means  of 
commercial  and  scientific  intercourse.  The  Indian  and  the  Classical  Cultures 
rejected  the  pretension  and  met  the  working  requirement  by  importation  from 
abroad;  it  was  as  a humble  tool  of  everyday  use  that  alphabetical  script  slowly 
won  their  acceptance.  With  this  event  rank,  as  contemporaneous  and  like  in 
significance,  the  introduction  into  China  of  the  phonetic  script  about  800, 
and  the  discovery  of  book-printing  in  the  West  in  the  fifteenth  century;  the 
symbol  of  duration  and  distance  was  reinforced  in  the  highest  degree  by  making 
it  accessible  to  the  large  number.  Finally  the  Civilisations  took  the  last  step 
and  brought  their  scripts  into  utilitarian  form.  As  we  have  seen,  the  discovery 
of  alphabetical  script  in  the  Egyptian  Civilization,  about  xooo,  was  a purely 
technical  innovation.  In  the  same  way  Li  Si,  Chancellor  to  the  Chinese  Augus- 
tus, introduced  the  Chinese  standard  script  in  xxy.  And  lastly,  amongst  our- 
selves — though  as  yet  few  of  us  have  appreciated  the  real  significance  of  the 
fact  — a new  kind  of  writing  has  appeared.  That  Egyptian  alphabetic  script 
is  in  no  wise  a final  and  perfected  thing  is  proved  by  the  discovery  of  its  fellow, 
our  stenography^  which  means  no  mere  shortening  of  writing,  but  the  overcoming 
of  the  alphabetic  script  by  a new  and  highly  abstract  mode  of  communication.  It  is  not 
impossible,  indeed,  that  in  the  course  of  the  next  centuries  script-forms  of  the 
shorthand  kind  may  displace  letters  completely. 

vm 

May  the  attempt  be  made,  thus  early,  to  write  a morphology  of  the  Culture- 
languages?  Certainly,  science  has  not  as  yet  even  discovered  that  there  is  such 
a task.  Culture-languages  are  languages  of  historical  men.  Their  Destiny 
accomplishes  itself  not  in  biological  spaces,  of  time,  but  in  step  with  the  organic 
evolution  of  strictly  limited  lifetimes.  Culture  languages  are  historical  languages^ 
which  means,  primarily,  that  there  is  no  historical  event  and  no  political 
institution  that  will  not  have  been  determined  in  part  by  the  spirit  of  the 
language  employed  in  it  and,  conversely,  that  will  not  have  its  influence  upon 
the  spiritual  form  of  that  language.  The  build  of  the  Latin  sentence  is  yet 
another  consequence  of  Rome’s  battles,  which  in  giving  her  conquests  com- 
pelled the  nation  as  a whole  to  think  administratively;  German  prose  bears 


PEOPLES,.  RA.CES,  TONGUES;  ; • 153 

traces  even  to-day  of  the  Thirty  Years’  War  in  its  want  of  established  norms, 
and  early  Christian  dogma  would  have  acquired  a different  shape  if  the  oldest 
Scriptures,  instead  of  being  one  and  all  written  in  Greek,  had  been  set  down  in 
Syriac  form  like"  those  of  the  Mandasans.  But  secondarily  it  means  that  world- 
history  is  dependent  — ^ to  a degree  that  students  have  hitherto  scarcely  imagined 
—‘  i4pon  the  existence  of  script  as  the  essentially  historical  means  of  communication. 
The  State  (in  the  higher  sense  of  the  word)  presupposes  intercourse  by  writing; 
the  style  of  all  politics  is  determined  absolutely  by  the  significance  that  the 
politico-historical  thought  of  the  nation  attaches  in  each  instance  to  charters 
and  archives,  to  signatures,  to  the  products  of  the  publicist;  the  battle  of 
legislation  is  a fight  for  or  against  a written  law;  constitutions  replace  ma- 
terial force  by  the  composition  of  paragraphs  and  elevate  a piece  of  writing  to 
the  dignity  of  a weapon.  Speech  belongs  with  the  present,  and  writing  with 
duration,  but  equally,  oral  understanding  pairs  with  practical  experience,  and 
writing  with  theoretical  thought.  The  bulk  of  the  inner  political  history  of 
all  Late  periods  can  be  traced  back  to  this  opposition.  The  ever-varying  facts 
resist  the  “letter,”  while  truths  demand  it  — that  is  the  world-historical  oppo- 
sition of  two  parties  that  in  one  form  or  another  is  met  with  in  the  great  crises 
of  all  Cultures.  The  one  lives  in  actuality,  the  other  flourishes  a text  in  its  face; 
all  great  revolutions  presuppose  a literature. 

The  group  of  Western  Culture-languages  appeared  in  the  tenth  century. 
The  available  bodies  of  language  — namely,  the  Germanic  and  Romance  dia- 
lects (monkish  Latin  included)  — were  developed  into  script-languages  under 
a single  spiritual  influence.  It  is  impossible  that  there  should  not  be  a common 
character  in  the  development  of  German,  English,  Italian,  French,  and  Spanish 
from  900  to  1900,  as  also  in  the  history  of  the  Hellenic  and  Italic  (Etruscan 
included)  between  1100  and  the  Empire.  But  what  is  it  that,  irrespective  of  the 
area  of  extension  of  language-families  or  races,  acquires  specific  unity  from  the 
landscape-limit  of  the  Culture  alone?  What  modifications  have  Hellenistic 
and  Latin  in  common  after  300  — in  pronunciation  and  idiom,  metrically, 
grammatically,  and  stylistically?  What  is  present  in  German  and  Italian  after 
1000,  but  not  in  Italian  and  Rumanian?  These  and  similar  questions  have 
never  yet  been  systematically  investigated. 

Every  Culture  at  its  awakening  finds  itself  in  the  presence  of  peasant-lan- 
guages, speeches  of  the  cityless  countryside,  “everlasting,”  and  almost  uncon- 
cerned with  the  great  events  of  history,  which  have  gone  on  through  late 
Culture  and  Civili2:ation  as  unwritten  dialects  and  slowly  undergone  imper- 
ceptible changes.  On  the  top  of  this  now  the  language  of  the  two  primary 
Estates  raises  itself  as  the  first  manifestation  of  a waking  relation  that  has 
Culture,  that  is  Culture.  Here,  in  the  ring  of  nobility  and  priesthood,  languages 
become  Culture-languages,  and,  more  particularly,  talk  belongs  with  the  castle, 
and  speech  to  the  cathedral.  And  thus  on  the  very  threshold  of  evolution  the 


154  : , ::THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  , 

plantlike  , separates  itself  from  the' animal,  the  destiny  of  the  living  from  the 
destiny  of  the  dead,  that^  of  the  organic  side  from  that  of  the  medianical  side  of 
understanding.  For  the  Totem  side  affirms  and  the  Taboo  side  denies,  blood  and 
Time.  Everywhere  we  meet,  and  very  early  indeed,  rigid  cult-languages  whose 
.sanctity  is  guaranteed  by  their  inalterability,  systems, long  dead,  or  alien  to  life 
;and, ■artificially  fettered,  which  have  the  strict  vocabulary  that  the  formulation 
of  eternal  truths  requires.  Old  Vedic  stiffened  as  a religious  language,  and 
with  it  Sanskrit  as  a savant-language.  The  Egyptian  of  the  Old  Kingdom  was 
perpetuated  as  priests’  language,  so  that  in  the  New  Empire  sacred  formiilie 
were  no  more  understandable  than  the  Carmen  Saliare  and  the  hymn  of  the 
Fratres  Atvales  in  Augustan  times. ^ In  the  Arabian  pre-Cul rural  period  Baby- 
lonian, Hebrew,  and  Avestan  simultaneously  went  out  of  use  as  workaday 
languages^ — probably  in  the  second  century  before  Christ  — indeed  on  that 
very  account  Jews  and  Persians  used  them  in  their  Scriptures  as  in  opposition  to 
Aramaic  and  Pehlevi.  The  same  significance  attached  to  Gothic  Latin  for  the 
Church,  Humanists’  Latin  for  the  learning  of  the  Baroque,  Church  Slavonic 
in  Russia,  and  no  doubt  Sumerian  in  Babylonia. 

In  contrast  with  this,  the  nursery  of  talk  is  in  the  early  castles  and  palaces 
of  assize.  Here  the  living  Culture-languages  have  been  formed.  Talk  is  the 
custom  of  speech,  its  manners  — “good  form”  in  the  intonation  and  idiom, 
fine  tact  in  choice  of  words  and  mode  of  expression.  All  these  things  arc  a 
mark  oi  race;  they  are  learned  not  in  the  monastery  cell  or  the  scholar’s  study, 
but  in  polite  intercourse  and  from  living  examples.  In  noble  society,  and  as  a 
hall-mark  of  nobility,  the  language  of  Homer, ^ as  also  the  old  French  of  the 
Crusades  and  the  Middle  High  German  of  the  Hohenstaufen,  were  erected  out 
of  the  ordinary  talk  of  the  country-side.  When  we  speak  of  the  great  epic 
poets,  the  Skalds,  the  Troubadours,  as  creators  of  language,  we  must  not 
forget  that  they  began  by  being  trained  for  their  task,  in  language  as  in  other 
things,  by  moving  in  noble  circles.  The  great  art  by  which  the  Culture  finds  its 
tongue  is  the  achievement  of  a race,  and  not  that  of  a craft. 

The  clerical  language  on  the  other  hand  starts  from  concepts  and  conclu- 
sions. It  labours  to  improve  the  dialectical  capacities  of  the  words  and  sen- 
tence-forms to  the  maximum.  There  sets  in,  consequently,  an  ever-increasing 
differentiation  of  scholastic  and  courtly,  of  the  idiom  of  intellectual  from  that 
of  social  intercourse.  Beyond  all  divisions  of  language-families  there  is  a 
component  common  to  the  expression  of  Plotinus  and  Thomas  Aquinas,  of 
Veda  and  Mishna.  Here  we  have  the  starting-point  of  all  the  ripe  scholar- 
languages  of  the  West  — which,  German  and  English  and  French  alike,  bear 

^ For  this  reason  I am  one  of  those  who  believe  that,  even  quite  late,  Etruscan  still  played  a very 
important  part  in  the  colleges  of  the  Roman  priesthood. 

^ Precisely  for  this  reason  it  has  to  be  recognized  that  the  Homeric  poems,  which  were  first 
fixed  in  the  colonization  period,  can  only  give  us  an  urban  literary  language  and  not  the  courtly 
conversation-language  in  which  they  were  originally  declaimed. 


PEOPLES,  RACES,  TONGUES  , ' 155 

to  this  day  the  unmistakable  signs  of  their  origin  in  scholars’  Latin  — and, 
therefore,  the  starting  point  of  all  the  apparatus  of  technical  expression  and 
logical  sentence-form.  This  opposition  between  the  modes  of  understanding  of 
“Society”  and  of  Science  renews  itself  again  and  again  till  far  into^ the  Late 
period.  The  centre  of  gravity  in  the  history  of  French  was  decisively  on  the 
side  of  race;  i.e.,  of  talk.  At  the  Court  of  Versailles,  in  the  salons  of  Paris, 
the  esprit  prSckux  of  the  Arthurian  romances  evolves  into  the  “conversation,” 
the  classical  art  of  talk,  whose  dictature  the  whole  West  acknowledges.  The 
fact  that  Ionic- Attic,  too,  was  fashioned  entirely  in  the  halls  of  the  tyrants 
and  in  symposia  created  great  difficulties  for  Greek  philosophy:  for  later  on, 
it  was  almost  impossible  to  discuss  the  syllogism  in  the  language  of  Alcibiades. 
On  the  other  hand,  German  prose,  in  the  decisive  phase  of  Baroque,  had  no 
central  point  on  which  it  could  rise  to  excellence,  and  so  even  to-day  it  oscillates 
in  point  of  style  between  French  and  Latin  — courtly  and  scholarly  — ac- 
cording as  the  author’s  intuition  is  to  express  himself  well  or  accurately.  Our 
Classical  writers,  thanks  to  their  linguistic  origin  in  office  or  study  and  their 
stay  as  tutors  in  the  castles  and  the  little  courts,  arrived  indeed  at  personal 
styles,  and  others  are  able  to  imitate  these  styles,  but  a specifically  German 
prose,  standard  for  all,  they  were  unable  to  create. 

To  these  two  class-languages  the  rise  of  the  city  added  a third,  the  language 
of  the  bourgeoisie,  which  is  the  true  script-speech,  reasoned  and  utilitarian, 
prose  in  the  strictest  sense*  of  the  word.  It  swings  gently  between  the  ex- 
pression-modes of  elegant  society  and  of  learning,  in  the  one  direction  thinking 
for  ever  of  new  turns  and  words  ^ la  mode,  in  the  other  keeping  sturdy  hold  on 
its  existing  stock  of  ideas.  But  in  its  inner  essence  it  is  of  a mercantile  nature. 
It  feels  itself  frankly  as  a class  badge  vis-h-vis  the  historyless-changeless  phras- 
ing of  the  “people”  which  Luther  and  others  employed,  to  the  great  scandal 
of  their  superficial  contemporaries.  With  the  final  victory  of  the  city  the 
urban  speech  absorbs  into  itself  that  of  elegance  and  that  of  learning.  There 
arises  in  the  upper  strata  of  megalopolitan  populations  the  uniform,  keenly 
intelligent,  practical  Koivi},  the  child  and  symbol  of  its  Civilkation,  equally 
averse  from  dialect  and  poetry  — something  perfectly  mechanical,  precise, 
cold,  leaving  as  little  as  possible  to  gesture.  These  final  homeless  and  rootless 
languages  can  be  learned  by  every  trader  and  porter  — Hellenistic  in  Carthage 
and  on  the  Oxus,  Chinese  in  Java,  English  in  Shanghai  — and  for  their  com- 
prehension talk  has  no  importance  or  meaning.  And  if  we  inquire  what  really 
created  these  languages,  we  find  not  the  spirit  of  a race  or  of  a religion,  but  the 
spirit  of  economics. 


CHAPTER  VI 


CITIES  AND  PEOPLES 
CO 

PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN 


CHAPTER  VI 


CITIES  AND  PEOPLES 

CC) 

PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN 

I 

Now  at  last  it  is  possible  to  approach  — if  with  extreme  precaution  — the 
conception  ''people,**  and  to  bring  order  into  that  chaos  of  people-forms  that  the 
historical  research  of  the  present  day  has  only  succeeded  in  making  worse 
confounded  than  before.  There  is  no  word  that  has  been  used  more  freely  and 
more  utterly  uncritically,  yet  none  that  calls  for  a stricter  critique,  than  this. 
Very  careful  historians,  even,  after  going  to  much  trouble  to  clear'  their  the- 
oretical basis  (up  to  a point)  slide  back  thereafter  into  treating  peoples,  race- 
parts,  and  speech-communities  as  completely  equivalent.  If  they  find  the  name 
of  a people,  it  counts  without  more  ado  as  the  designation  of  a language  as 
well.  If  they  discover  an  inscription  of  three  words,  they  believe  they  have 
established  a racial  connexion.  If  a few  "roots**  correspond,  the  curtain 
rises  at  once  on  a primitive  people  with  a primitive  habitat  in  the  background. 
And  the  modern  nationalist  spirit  has  only  enhanced  this  "thinking  in  terms 
of  peoples.’* 

But  is  it  the  Hellenes,  the  Dorians,  or  the  Spartans  that  are  a people?  If 
the  Romans  were  a people,  what  are  we  to  say  about  the  Latins?  And  what 
kind  of  a unit  within  the  population  of  Italy  at  c.  400  do  we  mean  by  the 
name  "Etruscan?”  Has  not  their  "nationality,”  like  that  of  Basques  and 
Thracians,  been  made  actually  to  depend  upon  the  build  of  their  language? 
What  ethnic  idea  underlies  the  words  "American,”  "Swiss,”  ‘'Jew,”  "Boer”? 
Blood,  speech,  faith,  State,  landscape  — what  in  all  these  is  determinative 
in  the  formation  of  a people?  In  general,  relationships  of  blood  and  language 
are  determined  only  by  way  of  scholarship,  and  the  ordinary  individual  is 
perfectly  unconscious  of  them.  "Indogermanic”  is  purely  and  simply  a 
scientific,  more  particularly  a philological,  concept.  The  attempt  of  Alexander 
the  Great  to  fuse  Greeks  and  Persians  together  was  a complete  failure,  and  we 
have  recently  had  experience  of  the  real  strength  of  Anglo-German  community 
of  feeling.  But  "people**  is  a linkage  of  which  one  is  conscious.  In  ordinary 
usage,  one  designates  as  one’s"  people”  — and  with  feeling  — that  com- 
munity, out  of  the  many  to  which  one  belongs,  which  inwardly  stands  nearest 

iss 


i'6o  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

to  one.^  And  then  he  extends  the  use  of  this  concept,  which  is  really  quite 
particular  and  derived  from  personal  experience,  to  collectivities  of  the  most 
varied  kinds*  For  Csesar  the  Arverni  were  a '^civitas'i  for  us  the  Chinese 
arc  a “nation.’*  On  this  basis,  it  was  the  Athenians  and  not  the  Greeks  who 
constituted  a nation,  and  in  fact  there  were  only  a few  individuals  who,  like 
Isocrates,  felt  themselves  pimarily  as  Hellenes.  On  this  basis,  one  of  two 
brothers  may  call  himself  a Swiss  and  the  other,  with  equal  right,  a German. 
These  are  not  philosophical  concepts,  but  historical  facts.  A people  is  an 
aggregate  of  men  which  feels  itself  a unit.  The  Spartiates  ^ felt  themselves  a 
people  in  this  sense;  the  “Dorians’*  of  iioo,  too,  probably,  but  those  of  400 
certainly  not.  The  Crusaders  became  genuinely  a people  in  taking  the  oath  of 
Clermont;  the  Mormons  in  their  expulsion  from  Missouri,  in  1839;  ® the 
Mamertines  ^ by  their  need  of  winning  for  themselves  a stronghold  of  refuge.® 
Was  the  formative  principle  very  different  with  the  Jacobins  and  Hyksos?  How 
many  peoples  may  have  originated  in  a chief’s  following  or  a band  of  fugitives? 
Such  a group  can  change  race,  like  the  Osmanli,  who  appeared  in  Asia  Minor 
as  Mongols;  or  language,  like  the  Sicilian  Normans;  or  name,  like  Achasans 
and  Danaoi,  So  long  as  the  common  feeling  is  there,  the  people  as  such  is  there. 

We  have  to  distinguish  the  destiny  of  a people  from  its  name.  The  latter 
is  often  the  only  thing  about  which  information  remains  to  us;*  but  can  we 
fairly  conclude  from  a name  anything  about  the  history,  the  descent,  the 
language,  or  even  merely  the  identity  of  those  who  bore  it?  Here  again  the 
historical  researcher  is  to  blame,  in  that,  whatever  his  theory  may  have  been, 
he  has  in  practice  treated  the  relation  between  name  and  bearer  as  simply  as  he 
would  treat,  say,  the  personal  names  of  to-day.  Have  we  any  conception  of 
the  number  of  unexplored  possibilities  in  this  field?  To  begin  with,  the  very 
act  of  name-giving  is  of  enormous  importance  in  early  associations.  For  with 
a name  the  human  group  consciously  sets  itself  up  with  a sort  of  sacral  dignity. 
But,  here,  cult-  and  war-names  may  exist  side  by  side;  others  the  land  or 
the  heritage  may  provide;  the  tribal  name  may  be  exchanged  for  that  of  an 
eponymous  hero,  as  with  the  Osmanli;  ® lastly,  an  unlimited  number  of  alien 
names  can  be  applied  along  the  frontiers  of  a group  without  more  than  a part  of 
the  community  ever  hearing  them  at  all.  If  only  such  names  as  these  be  handed 

^ So  much  so  that  the  workers  of  the  great  cities  call  themselves  the  People,  thereby  excluding 
the  bourgeoisie,  with  which  no  community  feeling  conjoins  them.  The  bourgeoisie  of  1789  did  ex- 
actly the  same. 

® The  dominant  nucleus  within  the  Spartan  ensemble.  — Tr. 

® Ed.  Meyer,  Ursprung  undGeschkhte  der  Marmonen  (191^),  pp.  iz8,  et  scq.  [An  extended  summary 
of  Mormon  history  will  be  found  in  the  article  “Mormons,”  Ency.  Brit,,  XI  ed.  — Tr.] 

^ Ex-mercenaries  of  Agathocles,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  who  seized  and  settled  in  Messina,  The 
questions  arising  out  of  this  act  precipitated  the  First  Punic  War.  — Tr, 

^ A still  more  celebrated  case  is  the  “ ambulatory  Polis”  formed  by  Xenophon's  Ten  Thou- 
sand, — Tr.  ' ' ■ ■ ■ ' 

® And  in  numerous  Classical  instances.— - Tn 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  i6i 

dowQ,  it  becomes  practically  inevitable  that  conclusions  about  the  bearers  of 
them  will  be  wrong.  The  indubitably  sacral  names  of  Franks,  Alemanni,  and 
Saxons  have  superseded  a host  of  names  of  the  period  of  the  Varus  battle  — but 
if  we  did  not  happen  to  know  this,  we  should  long  ago  have  been  convinced  that 
an  expulsion  or  annihilation  of  old  tribes  by  new  intruders  had  taken  place 
here.  The  names  ‘'Romans**  and  “Quirites,**  “Spartans”  and  “ Lacedaemo- 
nians, Carthaginian”  and  “Punic’'’  have  endured  side  by  side  — here  again 
there  was  a risk  of  supposing  two  peoples  instead  of  one.  In  what  relation  the 
names  “Pelasgi,”  “ Achasans,”  “Danai,”  stand  to  one  another  we  shall  never 
learn,  and  had  we  nothing  more  than  these  names,  the  scholar  would  long  ago 
have  assigned  to  each  a separate  people,  complete  with  language  and  racial 
affinities.  Has  it  not  been  attempted  to  draw  from  the  regional  designation 
“Doric”  conclusions  as  to  the  course  of  the  Dorian  migration?  How  often  may 
a people  have  adopted  a land-name  and  taken  it  along  with  them?  This  is  the 
case  with  the  modern  Prussians,  but  also  with  the  modern  Parsecs,  Jews,  and 
Turks,  while  the  opposite  is  the  case  in  Burgundy  and  Normandy.  The  name 
“ Hellenes*  ’ arose  about  650,  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  connected  with  any  move*' 
ment  of  population.  Lorraine  (Lothringen)  received  the  name  of  a perfectly  un- 
important prince,  and  that,  in  connexion  with  the  decision  of  a heritage  and 
not  a folk-migration.  Paris  called  the  Germans  Allemands  in  1814,  Prussians 
in  1870,  Boches  in  1914  — in  other  circumstances  three  distinct  peoples  might 
have  been  supposed  to  be  covered  by  these  names.  The  West-European  is 
called  in  the  East  a Frank,  the  Jew  a Spaniole  — the  fact  is  readily  explained 
by  historical  circumstances,  but  what  would  a philologist  have  produced  from 
the  words  alonel 

It  is  not  to  be  imagined  at  what  results  the  scholars  of  a.d.  3000  might  ar- 
rive if  they  worked  by  present-day  methods  on  names,  linguistic  remains, 
and  the  notion  of  original  homes  and  migration.  For  example,  the  Teutonic 
Knights  about  1300  drove  out  the  heathen  “Prussians,**  and  in  1870  these 
people  suddenly  appear  on  their  wanderings  at  the  gates  of  Paris!  The  Romans, 
pressed  by  the  Goths,  emigrate  from  the  Tiber  to  the  lower  Danube ! Or  a part 
of  them  perhaps  settled  in  Poland,  where  Latin  was  spoken?  Charlemagne  on 
the  Weser  defeated  the  Saxons,  who  thereupon  emigrated  to  the  neighbourhood 
of  Dresden,  their  places  being  taken  by  the  Hanoverians,  whose  original  settle- 
ment, according  to  the  dynasty-name,  was  on  the  Thames!  The  historian 
who  writes  down  the  history  of  names  instead  of  that  of  peoples,  forgets  that 
names,  too,  have  their  destinies.  So  also  languages,  which,  with  their  mi- 
grations, modifications,  victories,  and  defeats,  are  inconclusive  even  as  to  the 
existence  of  peoples  associated  with  them.  This  is  the  basic  error  of  Indo- 
Germanic  research  in  particular.  If  in  historic  times  the  names  “Pfak”  and 
“Calabria**  have  moved  about,  if  Hebrew  has  been  driven  from  Palestine  to 
Warsaw,  and  Persian  from  the  Tigris  to  India,  what  conclusions  can  be  drawn 


i6x  \ : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ' ■ 

from  the  history  of  the  Etruscan  name  and  the  alleged  “Tyrsenian”  inscription 
at  Lemnos?  ^ Or  did  the  French  and  the  Haytian  Negroes,  as  shown  by  their 
common  language,  once  form  a single  primitive  people?  In  the  region  between 
Budapest  and  Constantinople  to-day  two  Mongolian,  one  Semitic,  two  Classi- 
cal, and  three  Slavonic  languages  are  spoken,  and  these  speech-communities 
all  feel  themselves  essentially  as  peoples. ^ If  we  were  to  build  up  a migration- 
story  here,  the  error  of  the  method  would  be  manifested  in  some  singular  results. 
‘"Doric”  is  a dialect  designation  — that  we  know,  and  that  is  ail  we  know. 
No  doubt  some  few  dialects  of  this  group  spread  rapidly,  but  that  is  no  proof 
of  the  spread  or  even  of  the  existence  of  a human  stock  belonging  with  it.^ 

II 

Thus  we  come  to  the  pet  idea  of  modern  historical  thought.  If  a historian 
meets  a people  that  has  achieved  something,  he  feels  that  he  owes  it  to  these 
people  to  answer  the  question:  Whence  did  it  come?  It  is  a matter  of  dignity 
for  a people  to  have  come  from  somewhere  and  to  have  an  original  home. 
The  notion  that  it  is  at  home  in  the  place  where  we  find  it  is  almost  an  in- 
sulting assumption.  Wandering  is  a cherished  saga-motive  of  primitive  man- 
kind, but  its  employment  in  serious  research  also  has  become  a sheer  mania. 
Whether  the  Chinese  invaded  China  or  the  Egyptians  Egypt  no  one  inquires,  the 
question  being  always  when  and  whence  they  did  so.  It  would  be  less  of  an. effort 
to  originate  the  Semites  in  Scandinavia  or  the  Aryans  in  Canaan  than  to  abandon 
the  notion  of  an  original  home. 

Now,  the  fact  that  all  early  populations  were  highly  mobile  is  unquestion- 
able. In  it,  for  example,  lies  the  secret  of  the  Libyan  problem.  The  Libyans  or 
their  predecessors  spoke  Hamitic,  but,  as  shown  even  by  old  Egyptian  reliefs, 
they  were  all  blond  and  blue-eyed  and,  therefore,  doubtless  of  North-European 
provenance.^  In  Asia  Minor  at  least  three  migration-strata  since  1300  have 
been  determined,  which  are  related  probably  to  the  attacks  of  the  “ Sea-peoples” 
in  Egypt,  and  something  similar  has  been  shown  in  the  Mexican  Culture. 
But  as  to  the  nature  of  these  movements  we  know  nothing  at  all.  In  any  case, 
there  can  be  no  question  of  migrations  such  as  modern  historians  like  to  picture 

1 See  Ency,  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  Vol  IX,  p.  860.  — Tr. 

2 In  Macedonia,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  Serbs,  Bulgars,  and  Greeks  all  founded  schools  for 
the  anti-Turkish  population.  If  it  happens  that  a village  has  been  taught  Serb,  even  the  next  gen- 
eration consists  of  fanatical  Serbs.  The  present  strength  of  the  “nations’*  is  thus  merely  a conse- 
quence of  previous  school-policy. 

® For  Beloch’s  scepticism  concerning  the  reputed  Dorian  migration  see  his  Grischischt  Geschkhte^ 
1, 1,  Section  VUI.  [A  brief  account  of  the  question,  by  J.  L.  Myres,  is  in  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  article 
“Dorians.” — Tr.] 

^ C.  Mehlis,  Die  Berherfrage  (Archiv  fur  Anthrofologie  39,  pp.  249,  et  seq.)  where  relations  be^- 
tween  North  German  and  Mauretanian  ceramics,  and  even  resemblances  of  toponymy  (rivers,  moun. 
tains)  arc  dealt  with.  The  old  pyramid  buildings  of  West  Africa  arc  closely  related,  on  the  one  hand, 
to  the  Nordic  dolmens  (Hmengrdher)  of  Holstein  and,  on  the  other,  to  the  graves  of  the  Old  King- 
dom (some  illustrations  in  L.  Frobenius,  Der  kkimfrikanische  Grabbau,  1916). 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN^ 

•—movements  of  close-pressed  peoples  traversing  the  lands  in  great  masses, 
pushing  and  being  pushed  till  finally  they  come  to  rest  somewhere  or  other. 
It  is  not  the  alterations  in  themselves,  but  the  conceptions  we  have  formed 
about  them,  that  have  spoilt  our  outlook  upon  the  nature  of  the  peoples. 
Peoples  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word  do  not  wander,  and  that  which  of  old 
Mi  wander  needs  to  be  very  carefully  examined  before  it  is  labelled,  as  the 
label  will  not  always  stand  for  the  same  thing.  The  motive,  too,  that  is  ever- 
lastingly assigned  to  these  migrations  is  colourless  and  worthy  of  the  century 
that  invented  it  — material  necessity.  Hunger  would  normally  lead  to  efforts 
of  quite  a different  sort,  and  it  has  certainly  been  only  the  last  of  the  motives 
that  drove  men  of  race  out  of  their  nests  — although  it  is  understandable 
that  it  would  very  frequently  make  itself  felt  when  such  bands  suddenly  en- 
countered a military  obstacle.  It  was  doubtless,  in  this  simple  and  strong 
kind  of  man,  the  primary  microcosmic  urgency  to  move  in  free  space  which 
sprang  up  out  of  the  depths  of  his  soul  as  love  of  adventure,  daring,  liking  for 
power  and  booty;  as  a blazing  desire,  to  us  almost  incomprehensible,  for  deeds, 
for  joy  of  carnage,  for  the  death  of  the  hero.  Often,  too,  no  doubt,  domestic 
strife  or  fear  of  the  revenge  of  the  stronger,  was  the  motive,  but  again  a strong 
and  manly  one.  Motives  like  these  are  infectious  ^ — the  “man  who  stays 
at  home’’  is  a coward.  Was  it  common  bodily  hunger,  again,  that  induced 
the  Crusades,  or  the  expeditions  of  Cortez  and  Pizarro,  or  in  our  time  the  ven- 
tures’ of  “wild  west”  pioneers?  Where,  in  history,  we  find  the  little  handful 
invading  wide  lands,  it  is  ever  the  voices  of  the  blood,  the  longing  for  high 
destinies,  that  drive  them. 

Further,  we  have  to  consider  the  position  in  the  country  traversed  by  the 
invaders.  Its  characteristics  are  always  modified  more  or  less,  but  the  modi- 
fications are  due  not  merely  to  the  influence  of  the  immigrants,  but  more  and 
more  to  the  nature  of  the  settled  population,  which  in  the  end  becomes  numeri- 
cally overwhelming. 

Obviously,  in  spaces  almost  empty  of  men  it  is  easy  for  the  weaker  simply 
to  evade  the  onslaught,  and  as  a rule  he  was  able  to  do  so.  But  in  later  and 
denser  conditions,  the  inroad  spelt  dispossession  for  the  weaker,  who  must 
either  defend  himself  successfully  or  else  win  new  lands  for  old.  Already 
there  is  the  out-thrust  into  space.  No  tribe  lives  without  constant  contacts 
on  all  sides  and  a mistrustful  readiness  to  stand  to  arms.  The  hard  necessity 
of  war  breeds  men.  Peoples  grow  by,  and  against,  other  peoples  to  inward 
greatness.  Weapons  become  weapons  against  men  and  not  beasts.  And  finally 
we  have  the  only  migration-form  that  counts  in  historic  times — warrior 
bands  sweep  through  thoroughly  populated  countries,  whose  inhabitants 
remain,  undisturbed  and  upstanding,  as  an  essential  part  of  the  spoils  of  victory. 
And  then,  the  victors  being  in  a minority,  completely  new  situations  arise. 
Peoples  of  strong  inward  form  spread  themselves  on  top  of  much  larger  but 


i64  the  DECLINE-.  OF  THE  WEST  , 

formless  populations,  and  the  further  transformations  of  peoples,  languages, 
and  races  depend  upon  very  complicated  factors  of  detail.  Since  the  decisive 
investigations  of  Beloch  ^ and  Delbriick  ^ we  know  that  all  migrant  peoples  — 
and  the  Persians  of  Cyrus,  the  Mamertines  and  the  Crusaders,  the  Ostrogoths 
and  the  “Sea-peoples’’  of  the  Egyptian  inscriptions  were  all  peoples  in  this 
sense— were,  in  comparison  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  regions  they  occu- 
pied, very  small  in  numbers,  just  a few  thousand  warriors,  superior  to  the  na- 
tives only  in  respect  of  their  determination  to  be  a Destiny  and  not  to  submit  to 
one.  It  was  not  inhabitable,  but  inhabited,  land  of  which  they  took  possession, 
and  thus  the  relation  between  the  two  peoples  became  a question  of  status,  the 
migration  turned  into  the  campaign,  and  the  process  of  settling  down  became 
a political  process.  And  here  again,  in  presence  of  the  fact  that  at  a historic 
distance  of  time  the  successes  of  a small  war-band,  with  the  consequent  spread 
uf  the  victor’s  names  and  language,  may  all  too  easily  be  taken  for  a “mi- 
gration of  peoples,”  it  is  necessary  to  repeat  out  question,  what,  in  fact,  the 
men,  things,  and  factors  are  that  can  migrate. 

Here  are  some  of  the  answers  — the  name  of  a district  or  that  of  a collec- 
tivity (or  of  a hero,  adopted  by  his  followers),  in  that  it  spreads,  becomes 
extinct  here  and  is  taken  by  or  given  to  a totally  different  population  there: 
in  that  it  may  pass  from  land  to  people  and  travel  with  the  latter  or  vice  versa 
— the  language  of  the  conqueror  or  that  of  the  conquered,  or  even  a third 
language,  adopted  for  reciprocal  understanding  — the  war-band  of  a chief  which 
subdues  whole  countries  and  propagates  itself  through  captive  women,  or  some 
accidental  group  of  heterogeneous  adventurers,  or  a tribe  with  its  women  and 
children,  like  the  Philistines  of  ixoo,  who  quite  in  the  Germanic  fashion 
trekked  with  their  ox-wagons  along  the  Phoenician  coast  to  Egypt. ^ In  such 
conditions,  we  may  again  ask,  can  conclusions  be  drawn  from  the  destinies  of 
names  and  languages  as  to  those  of  peoples  and  races?  There  is  only  one  possible 
answer,  a decided  negative. 

Amongst  the  “Sea-peoples”  that  repeatedly  attacked  Egypt  in  the  thir- 
teenth century  appear  the  names  and  Achssans  — but  in  Homer  both 

are  almost  mythical  designations  — the  name  of  the  Lukka  — which  adhered 
later  to  Lycia,  though  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  called  themselves 
Tramilx  — and  the  names  of  the  Etruscans,  the  Sards,  the  Sicuii  — but  this  in 
nowise  proved  that  these  “Tursha”  spoke  the  later  Etruscan,  nor  that  there 
was  the  slightest  physical  connexion  with  the  like-named  inhabitants  of 
Italy  or  anything  else  entitling  us  to  speak  of  “one  and  the  same  people.” 
Assuming  that  the  Lemnos  inscription  is  Etruscan,  and  Etruscan  an  Indo- 
germanic  language,  much  could  be  deduced  therefrom  in  the  domain  of  linguis- 

^ Die  Bevolkermg  der  griechisch-romischen  Welt  (1886). 

® Geschichte  der  Kriegskunst  (from  1900). 

^ Ramcscs  III,  who  defeated  them,  portrayed  their  expedition  in  the  relief  of  Medinet  Habct. 
W.  M-  Muller,  Asien  und  Euro-pa,  p.  366. 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  165 

tic  history,  but  in  that  of  racial  history  nothing  whatever.  Rome  was  an 
Etruscan  city,  but  is  not  the  fact  completely  without  bearing  upon  the  sod 
of  the  Roman  people?  Are  the  Romans  Indogermanic  because  they  happen  to 
speak  a Latin  dialect?  The  ethnologists  recognize  a Mediterranean  Race 
and  an  Alpine  Race,  and  north  and  south  of  these  an  astonishing  physical 
resemblance  between  North-Germans  and  Libyans;  but  the  philologists  know 
that  the  Basques  are  in  virtue  of  their  speech  a “pre-Indogermanic*’  — Iberian 
— population.  The  two  views  are  mutually  exclusive.  Were  the  builders  of 
Mycenae  and  Tiryns  “Hellenes’’?  — it  would  be  as  pertinent  to  ask  were  the 
Ostrogoths  Germans.  I confess  that  I do  not  comprehend  why  such  questions 
are  formulated  at  all. 

For  me,  the  “people”  is  a unit  of  the  soul.  The  great  events  of  history  were 
not  really  achieved  by  peoples;  they  themselves  created  the  po-ples.  Every  act 
alters  the  soul  of  the  doer.  Even  when  the  event  is  preceded  by  some  grouping 
around  or  under  a famous  name,  the  fact  that  there  is  a people  and  not  merely 
a band  behind  the  prestige  of  that  name  is  not  a condition,  but  a result  of  the 
event.  It  was  the  fortunes  of  their  migrations  that  made  the  Ostrogoths  and 
the  Osmanli  what  they  afterwards  were.  The  “Americans”  did  not  immigrate 
from  Europe;  the  name  of  the  Florentine  geographer  Amerigo  Vespucci  desig- 
nates to-day  not  only  a continent,  but  also  a people  in  the  true  sense  of  the 
word,  whose  specific  character  was  born  in  the  spiritual  upheavals  of  1775  and, 
above  all,  1861-5. 

This  is  the  one  and  only  connotation  of  the  word  “people.”  Neither  unity 
of  speech  nor  physical  descent  is  decisive.  That  which  distinguishes  the 
people  from  the  population,  raises  it  up  out  of  the  population,  and  will  one 
day  let  it  find  its  level  again  in  the  population  is  always  the  inwardly  lived 
experience  of  the  “we.”  The  deeper  this  feeling  is,  the  stronger  is  the  vis  viva 
of  the  people.  There  are  energetic  and  tame,  ephemeral  and  indestructible,  forms 
of  peoples.  They  can  change  speech,  name,  race,  and  land,  but  so  long  as 
their  soul  lasts,  they  can  gather  to  themselves  and  transform  human  material 
of  any  and  every  provenance.  The  Roman  name  in  Hannibal’s  day  meant  a 
people,  in  Trajan’s  time  nothing  more  than  a population. 

Of  course,  it  is  often  quite  justifiable  to  align  peoples  with  races,  but  “race” 
in  this  connexion  must  not  be  interpreted  in  the  present-day  Darwinian  sense 
of  the  word.  It  cannot  be  accepted,  surely,  that  a people  was  ever  held  to- 
gether by  the  mere  unity  of  physical  origin,  or,  if  it  were,  could  maintain  that 
unity  even  for  ten  generations.  It  cannot  be  too  often  reiterated  that  this 
physiological  provenance  has  no  existence  except  for  science  — never  for  folk- 
consciousness — and  that  no  people  was  ever  yet  stirred  to  enthusiasm  for 
this  ideal  of  blood-purity.  In  race  there  is  nothing  material,  but  something 
cosmic  and  directional,  the  felt  harmony  of  a Destiny,  the  single  cadence  of  the 
march  of  historical  Being.  It  is  inco-ordination  of  this  (wholly  metaphysical} 


^ ^ THE  WEST  ■ ■ 

beat  that  produces  race-hatred,  which  is  just  as  strong  between  Germans  and 
Frenchmen  as  it  is  between  Germans  and  Jews,  and  it  is  resonance  on  this  beat 
that  makes  the  true  love  ■ — so  akin  to  hate  — between  man  and  wife.  He  who 
has  not  ra’ce  knows  nothing  of  this  perilous  love.  If  a part  of  the  human  multi- 
tude that  now  speaks  Indogermanic  languages,  cherishes  a certain  race- 
ideal,  what  is  evidenced  thereby  is  not  the  existence  of  the  prototype-people 
so  dear  to  the  scholar,  but  the  metaphysical  force  and  power  of  the  ideal.  It 
is  highly  significant  that  this  ideal  is  expressed,  never  in  the  whole  population, 
but  mainly  in  its  warrior-element  and  pre-eminently  in  its  genuine  nobility  — 
that  is,  in  men  who  live  entirely  in  a world  of  facts,  under  the  spell  of  historical 
becoming,  destiny-men  who  will  and  dare  — ar  d it  was  precisely  in  the  early 
times  (another  significant  point)  that  a born  alien  of  quality  and  dignity  could 
without  particular  difficulty  gain  admittance  to  the  ruling  class,  and  wives  in 
particular  were  chosen  for  their  “ breed ’V  and  not  their  descent.  Correspond- 
ingly, the  impress  of  race-traits  is  weakest  (as  may  be  observed  even  to-day)  in 
the  true  priestly  and  scholarly  natures,^  even  though  these  often  do  stand  in 
close  blo<^-relationship  to  the  others.  A strong  spirit  trains  up  the  body  into  a 
product  of  art.  The  Romans  formed,  in  the  midst  of  the  confused  and  even 
heteroclite  tribes  of  Italy,  a race  of  the  firmest  and  strictest  inward  unity  that 
was  neither  Etruscan  nor  Latin  nor  merely  “Classical,*)  but  quite  specifically 
Roman.^  Nowhere  is  the  force  that  cements  a people  set  before  us  more  plainly 
than  in  Roman  busts  of  the  late  Republican  period. 

1 will  cite  yet  another  example,,  than  which  none  more  clearly  exhibits  the 
errors  that  these  scholars*  notions  of  people,  language,  and  race  inevitably 
entail,  and  in  which  lies  the  ultimate,  perhaps  the  determining  reason  why  the 
Arabian  Culture  has  never  yet  been  recognized  as  an  organism.  It  is  that  of 
the  Persians.  Persian  is  an  Aryan  language,  hence  “the  Persians**  are  an 
“Indogermanic  people,**  and  hence  Persian  history  and  religion  are  the  affair 
of  “Iranian”  philology. 

To  begin  with,  is  Persian  a language  of  equal  rank  with  the  Indian,  derived 
from  a common  ancestor,  ir  it  merely  an  Indian  dialectl  Seven  centuries  of 
linguistic  development,  scriptless  and  therefore  very  rapid,  lie  between  the 
Old  Vedic  of  the  Indian  texts  and  the  Behistun  Inscription  ® of  Darius.  It  is 
almost  as  great  a gap  as  that  between  the  Latin  of  Tacitus  and  the  French  of 
the  Strassbufg  Oath  of  84^.^  Now  the  Tell-el-Amarna  letters  and  the  archives 

^ Which,  therefore,  have  discovered  for  themselves  the  nonsensical  designation  “aristocracy 
oi  mttlltOi*  (Geistesadel'^. 

2 Although  — or  should  we  say  “thus”?  — Rome  accorded  citizenship  to  freedmen,  who  in 
general  were  of  wholly  alien  blood,  and  sons  of  ex-slaves  were  admitted  to  the  Senate  even  by  Ap» 
pius  Claudius  the  Censor  in  310.  One  of  them,  Flavius,  had  already  been  curnle  sedile. 

® See  articles  “Persia  (history:  ancient),’* “Behistun,”  “Cuneiform,”  in  Ency.  Brit.y  XI  cd., 
or  indeed  almost  any  work  upon  Babylonian  and  Persian  antiquities-  — Tr. 

^ Sworn  by  Louis  the  German  and  Charles  the  Bald  in  both  languages.  The  manuscript  of 
the  oath,  however,  is  later  — say,  950.  — Tr. 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  167 

of  Boghaz  Keiii  tell  us  juanj  “Aryan**  names  of  persons  and  gods  of  the  middle 
of  the  second  millennium  bx.  — that  is,  the  Vedic  Age  of  Chivalry.  It  is 
Palestine  and  Syria  that  furnish  these  names.  Nevertheless,  Eduard  Meyer 
observes  ^ that  they  are  Indian  and  not  Persian,  and  the  same  holds  good  for 
the  numerals  that  have  now  been  discovered. ^ There  is  not  a unit  of  Persians, 
or  of  any  other  “people**  in  the  sense  of  our  historical  writers.  They  were 
Indian  heroes,  who  rode  westward  and  with  their  precious  weapon  the  war- 
horse  and  their  own  ardent  energy  made  themselves  felt  as  a power  far  and  wide 
in  the  ageing  Babylonian  Empire. 

About  600  there  appears  in  the  middle  of  this  world  Persis,  a little  district 
with  a politically  united  population  of  peasant  barbarians.  Herodotus  says 
that  of  its  tribes  only  three  were  of  genuine  Persian  nationality.  Had  the 
language  of  these  knights  of  old  lived  on  in  the  hills,  and  is  “Persians**  really 
a land-name  that  passed  to  a people?  The  Medes,  who  were  very  similar,  bear 
only  the  name  of  a land  where  an  upper  warrior-stratum  had  learned  through 
great  political  successes  to  feel  itself  as  a unit.  In  the  Assyrian  archives  of 
Sargon  and  his  successors  (about  700)  are  found,  along  with  the  non- Aryan 
place-names,  numerous  “Aryan**  names  of  persons,  all  leading  figures,  but 
Tiglath-Pileser  IV  (745-717)  calls  the  people  black-haired.^  It  can  only  have 
been  later  that  the  “Persian  people”  of  Cyrus  and  Darius  was  formed,  out  of 
men  of  varied  provenance,  but  forged  to  a strong  inner  unity  of  lived  experience. 
But  when,  scarce  two  centuries  later,  the  Macedonians  put  an  end  to  their 
lordship — was  it  that  the  Persians  in  this  form  were  no  longer  in  existencel 
(Was  there  still  a Lombard  people  at  all  in  Italy  in  a.d.  900?)  It  is  certain  that 
the  very  wide  diffusion  of  the  empire-language  of  Persia,  and  the  distribution 
of  the  few  thousands  of  adult  males  from  Persia  over  the  immense  system  of  mil- 
itary and  administrative  business,  must  long  ago  have  led  to  the  dissolution  of 
the  Persian  nation  and  set  up  in  its  place,  as  carriers  of  the  Persian  name 
an  upper-class  conscious  of  itself  as  a political  unit,  of  whose  members  very 
few  could  have  claimed  descent  from  the  invaders  from  Persia.^  There  is, 
indeed,  not  even  a country  that  can  be  considered  as  the  theatre  of  Persian 
history.  The  events  of  the  period  from  Darius  to  Alexander  took  place  partly 
in  northern  Mesopotamia  (that  is,  in  the  midst  of  an  Aramaic-speaking  popula- 
tion), partly  lower  down  in  old  Sinear,  anywhere  but  in  Persis,  where  the  hand- 
some buildings  begun  by  Xerxes  were  never  carried  out.  The  Parthians  of  the 
succeeding  Ach^emenid  period  were  a Mongol  tribe  which  had  adopted  a Persian 
dialect  and  in  the  midst  of  this  people  sought  to  embody  the  Persian  national 
feeling  in  themselves. 

^ “ T>u  altesUn  datierten  Zeugnisse  der  iranischm  Spachd'  (jL4tschr.  /.  Sprachf.  41,  p.  16.) 

2 See  above,  p.  145. 

* Ed.  Meyer,  op.  cit.,  pp.  i,  ct  seq. 

^ Compare  the  absorption  of  the  Norman  conquerors  into  England^and  the  subsequent  develop- 
ment of  an  English  aristocracy.  — Tr, 


i68 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

Here  the  Persian  religion  emerges  as  a problem  no  less  difficult  than  those 
of  race  and  language.^  Scholarship  has  associated  it  with  these  as  though  the 
association  were  self-evident,  and  has,  therefore,  treated  it  always  with  refer- 
ence to  India.  But  the  religion  of  these  land-Vikings  was  not  related  to,  it  was 
identical  with  the  Vedic,  as  shown  by  the  divine  pairs  Mitra-Varuna  and  Indra- 
Nasatya  of  the  Boghaz  Keiii  texts.  And  within  this  religion  which  held  up  its 
head  in  the  middle  of  the  Babylonian  world  Zarathustra  now  appeared,  from 
out  of  the  lower  ranks  of  the  people,  as  reformer.  It  is  known  that  he  was  not 
a Persian.  That  which  he  created  (as  I hope  to  show)  was  a transfer  of  Vedk 
religion  into  the  forms  of  the  Aramaan  world-contemplation,  in  which  already 
there  were  the  faint  beginnings  of  the  Magian  religiousness.  The  davas,  the 
gods  of  the  old  Indian  beliefs,  grew  to  be  the  demons  of  the  Semitic  and  the 
jinn  of  the  Arabian.  * Yahweh  and  Beelzebub  are  related  to  one  another  pre- 
cisely as  Ahuramazda  and  Ahriman  in  this  peasant-religion,  which  was  essen- 
tially Aramaean  and,  therefore,  founded  in  an  ethical-dualistic  world-feeling. 
Eduard  Meyer  ^ has  correctly  established  the  difference  between  the  Indian 
and  the  Iranian  view  of  the  world,  but,  owing  to  his  erroneous  premisses,  has 
not  recognized  its  origin.  Zarathustra  is  a travelling-companion  of  the  prophets  of 
Israel^  who  like  him,  and  at  the  same  time,  transformed  the  old  (Mosaic- 
Canaanitish)  beliefs  of  the  people.  It  is  significant  that  the  whole  eschatology 
is  a common  possession  of  the  Persian  and.  Jewish  religions,  and  that  the  Avesta 
texts  were  originally  written  in  Aramaic  (in  Parthian  times)  and  only  after- 
wards translated  into  Pehlevi.^ 

But  already  in  Parthian  times  there  occurred  amongst  both  Persians  and 
Jews  that  profoundly  intimate  change  which  makes  no  longer  tribal  attach- 
ment but  orthodoxy  the  hall-mark  of  nationality.^  A Jew  who  went  over  to 
the  Mazda  faith  became  thereby  a Persian;  a Persian  who  became  a Christian 
belonged  to  the  Nestorian  “people.”  The  very  dense  population  of  north- 
ern Mesopotamia  — the  motherland  of  the  Arabian  Culture  — is  partly  of 
Jewish  and  partly  of  Persian  nationality  in  this  sense  of  the  word,  which  is 
not  at  all  concerned  with  race  and  very  little  with  language.  Even  before 
the  birth  of  Christ,  “Infidel”  designates  the  non-Persian  as  it  designates  the 
non-Jew. 

This  nation  is  the  “Persian  people”  of  the  Sassanid  empire,  and,  connected 
with  the  fact,  we  find  that  Pehlevi  and  Hebrew  die  out  simultaneously,  Ara- 
maic becoming  the  mother  tongue  of  both  communities.  If  we  speak  in  terms 
of  Aryans  and  Semites,  the  Persians  in  the  time  of  the  Tell-el-Amarna  Corre- 

^ For  what  follows,  cf.  Ch.  VII  — IX. 

2 Geschichte  des  Altertums,  I,  § 590,  ct  scq. 

* Andreas  and  Wackernagcl,  Nachrichten  der  Gottingischen  Gesellschaft  der  Wissmschajtm  (1911), 
p.  I,  et  seq.  [On  the  subject  generally, sec  articles  by  X.  Gcldncr,  Zend-Avesta’*  and  “Zoroaster,” 
and  by  Ed.  Meyer,  “Parthia,”  in  Enty.  Brit,,  XI  cd.  — Tr.] 

^ Sec,  farther,  below. 


primitives;  culture-peoples,  fellaheen  169 

spondeflce  were  Aryans,  but  no  “people**:  in  that  of  Darius  a people,  but  with- 
out race:  in  Sassanid  times  a community  of  believers,  but  of  Semitic  origin. 
There  is  ho  proto-Persian  “people**  branched  off  from  the  Aryan; nor  a general 
history  of  the  Persians,  and  for  the  three  special  histories,  which  are  held  to- 
gether only  by  certain  linguistic  relations,  there  is  not  even  a common  historical 
theatre. 


With  this  are  laid,  at  last,  the  foundations  for  a morphology  of  peoples.  Di- 
rectly its  essence  is  seen,  we  see  also  an  inward  order  in  the  historical  stream  of 
the  peoples.  They  are  neither  linguistic  nor  political  nor  zoological,  but 
spiritual,  units.  And  this  leads  at  once  to  the  further  distinction  between 
peoples  heforoy  within^  and  after  a Culture.  It  is  a fact  that  has  been  profoundly 
felt  in  all  ages  that  Culture-peoples  are  more  distinct  in  character  than  the  rest. 
Their  predecessors  I will  call  primitive  peoples.  These  are  the  fugitive  and 
heterogeneous  associations  that  form  and  dissolve  without  ascertainable  rule, 
till  at  last,  in  the  presentiment  of  a still  unborn  Culture  (as,  for  example,  in  the 
pre-Homeric,  the  pre-Christian,  and  the  Germanic  periods),  phase  by  phase, 
becoming  ever  more  definite  in  type,  they  assemble  the  human  material  of  a 
population  into  groups,  though  all  the  time  little  or  no  alteration  has  been  oc- 
curring in  the  stamp  of  man.  Such  a superposition  of  phases  leads  from  the 
Cimbri  and  Teutones  through  the  Marcomanni  and  Goths  to  the  Franks,  Lom- 
bards, and  Saxons.  Instances  of  primitive  peoples  are  the  Jews  and  Persians  of 
the  Seleucid  age,  the  “Sea-peoples,**  the  Egyptian  Nomes  of  Menes’s  time.^ 
And  that  which  follows  a Culture  we  may  call  — from  its  best-known  example, 
the  Egyptians  of  post-Roman  times  — fellah-peoples. 

In  the  tenth  century  of  our  era  the  Faustian  soul  suddenly  awoke  and  mani- 
fested itself  in  innumerable  shapes.  Amongst  these,  side  by  side  .with  the 
architecture  and  the  ornament,  there  appears  a distinctly  characterized  form 
of  ‘ * people.  ’ * Out  of  the  people-shapes  of  the  Carolingian  Empire  — the  Saxons, 
Swabians,  Franks,  Visigoths,  Lombards  — arise  suddenly  the  German,  the 
French,  the  Spaniards,  the  Italians.  Hitherto  (consciously  and  deliberately  or 
not)  historical  research  has  uniformly  regarded  these  Culture-peoples  as  some- 
thing in  being,  as  primaries,  and  have  treated  the  Culture  itself  as  secondary,  as 
their  product.  The  creative  units  of  history,  accordingly,  were  simply  the 
Indians,  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  the  Germans,  and  so  on.  As  the  Greek  Cul- 
ture was  the  work  of  the  Hellenes,  they  must  have  been  in  existence  as  such  far 
earlier;  therefore  they  must  have  been  immigrants.  Any  other  idea  of  creator 
and  creation  seemed  inconceivable.  ^ 

I regard  it,  therefore,  as  a discovery  of  decisive  importance  that  the  facts 
here  set  forth  lead  to  the  reverse  conclusion.  It  will  be  established  in  all  rigour 

^ Dynasty  L — Tr. 


170  ; ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  : : 

that  the  great  Cultures  are  entities,  primary  or  original,  that  arise  out  of  the 
deepest  foundations  of  spirituality,  and  that  the  peoples  under  the  spell  of  a 
Culture  are,  alike  in  their  inward  form  and  in  their  whole  manifestation,  its 
products  and  not  its  authors.  These  shapes  in  which  humanity  is  seized  and 
moulded  possess  style  and  style-history  no  less  than  kinds  of  art  and  modes  of 
thought.  The  people  of  Athens  is  a symbol  not  less  than  the  Doric  temple, 
the  Englishman  not  less  than  modern  physics.  There  are  peoples  of  Apollinian, 
Magian,  Faustian  cast.  The  Arabian  Culture  was  not  created  by  ‘‘  the  Arabs*’ 
— quite  the  contrary;  for  the  Magian  Culture  begins  in  the  time  of  Christ,  and 
the  Arabian  people  represents  its  last  great  creation  of  that  kind,  a community 
bonded  by  Islam  as  the  Jewish  and  Persian  communities  before  it  had  been 
bonded  by  their  religions.  World-history  is  the  history  of  the  great  Cultures, 
and  peoples  are  but  the  symbolic  forms  and  vessels  in  which  the  men  of  these 
Cultures  fulfil  their  Destinies. 

In  each  of  these  Cultures,  Mexican  and  Chinese,  Indian  and  Egyptian,  there 
is  — whether  our  science  is  aware  of  it  or  not  — a group  of  great  peoples  of  identical 
style,  which  arises  at  the  beginning  of  the  springtime,  forming  states  and  carry- 
ing history,  and  throughout  the  course  of  its  evolution  bears  its  fundamental 
form  onward  to  the  goal.  They  are  in  the  highest  degree  unlike  amongst 
themselves  — it  is  scarcely  possible  to  conceive  of  a sharper  contrast  than  that 
between  Athenians  and  Spartans,  Germans  and  Frenchmen,  Tsin  and  Tsu  — 
and  all  military  history  shows  national  hatred  as  the  loftiest  method  of  in- 
ducting historic  decisions.  But  the  moment  that  a people  alien  to  the  Culture 
makes  an  appearance  in  the  field  of  history,  there  awakens  everywhere  an  over- 
powering feeling  of  spiritual  relationship,  and  the  notion  of  the  barbarian  — 
meaning  the  man  who  inwardly  does  not  belong  to  the  Culture  — is  as  clear-cut 
in  the  peoples  of  the  Egyptian  settlements  and  the  Chinese  world  of  states  as  it 
is  in  the  Classical.  The  energy  of  the  form  is  so  high  that  it  grasps  and  recasts 
neighbouring  peoples,  witness  the  Carthaginians  of  Roman  times  with  their 
half-Classical  style,  and  the  Russians  who  have  figured  as  a people  of  Western 
style  from  Catherine  the  Great  to  the  fall  of  Petrine  Tsardom. 

Peoples  in  the  style  of  their  Culture  we  will  call  Nations,  the  word  itself 
distinguishing  \hem  from  the  forms  that  precede  and  that  follow  them.  It  is 
not  merely  a strong  feeling  of  “we”  that  forges  the  inward  unity  of  its  most 
significant  of  all  major  associations;  underlying  the  nation  there  is  an  Idea,  This 
stream  of  a collective  being  possesses  a very  deep  relation  to  Destiny,  to  Time, 
and  to  History,  a relation  that  is  different  in  each  instance  and  one,  too,  that 
determines  the  relation  of  the  human  material  to  race,  language,  land,  state, 
and  religion.  As  the  styles  of  the  Gld  Chinese  and  the  Classical  peoples  differ, 
so  also  the  styles  of  their  histories. 

Life  as  experienced  by  primitive  and  by  fellaheen  peoples  is  just  the  zo- 
ological up-^and-down,  a planless  happening  without  goal  or  cadenced  march  in 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEE;N  171 

time,  whereia  occurrences  are  many,  but,  in  the  last  analysis,  devoid  of  signifi- 
cance. The  only  historical  peoples,  the  peoples  whose  existence  u wofld-Mstory^ 
are  the  nations.  Let  us  be  perfectly  clear  as  to  what  is  meant  by  this.  The 
Ostrogoths  suffered  a great  destiny,  and  therefore,  inwardly,  they  have  no 
history.  Their  battles  and  settlements  were  not  necessary  and  therefore  were 
episodic;  their  end  was  insignificant.  In  1500  b.c.  that  which  lived  about 
Mycenae  and  Tiryns  was  not  as  yet  a nation,  and  that  which  lived  in  Minoan 
Crete  was  m longer  a nation.  Tiberius  was  the  last  ruler  who  tried  to  lead  a 
Roman  nation  further  on  the  road  of  history,  who  sought  to  retrieve  it  for  his- 
tory. By  Marcus  Aurelius  there  was  only  a Romanic  population  to  be  defended  — - 
a field  for  occurrences,  but  no  longer  for  history.  How  many  free  pre-genera- 
tions of  Mede  or  Achaean  or  Hun  folk  there  were,  in  what  sort  of  social  groups 
their  predecessors  and  their  descendants  lived,  cannot  be  determined  and  de- 
pends upon  no  rule.  But  of  a nation  the  life-period  is  determinate,  and  so  are 
the  pace  and  the  rhythm  in  which  its  history  moves  to  fulfilment.  From  the 
beginning  of  the  Chou  period  to  the  rulership  of  Shih-Hwang-ti,  from  the  events 
on  which  the  Troy  legend  was  founded  to  Augustus,  and  from  Thinite  times  to 
the  XVIII  Dynasty,  the  numbers  of  generations  are  more  or  less  the  same.  The 
'‘Late*’  period  of  the  Culture,  from  Solon  to  Alexander,  from  Luther  to  Na- 
poleon, embraces  no  more  than  about  ten  generations.  Within  such  limits  the 
destiny  of  the  genuine  Culture-people,  and  with  it  that  of  world-history  in 
general,  reach  fulfilment.  The  Romans,  the  Arabs,  the  Prussians,  are  late-botn 
nations.  How  many  generations  of  Fabii  and  Junii  had  already  come  and  gone 
as  Romans  hj  the  time  Cannae  was  fought? 

Further,  nations  are  the  true  city-building  peoples.  In  the  strongholds  they 
arose,  with  the  cities  they  ripen  to  the  full  height  of  their  world-consciousness, 
and  in  the  world-cities  they  dissolve.  Every  town-formation  that  has  character 
has  also  national  character.  The  village,  which  is  wholly  a thing  of  race,  does 
not  yet  possess  it;  the  megalopolis  possesses  it  no  longer.  Of  this  essential, 
which  so  characteristically  colours  the  nation’s  public  life  that  its  slightest 
manifestation  identifies  it,  we  cannot  exaggerate  — we  can  scarcely  imagine  — 
the  force,  the  self-sufficingness,  and  the  loneliness.  If  between  the  souls  of  two 
Cultures  the  screen  is  impenetrable,  if  no  Western  may  ever  hope  completely  to 
understand  the  Indian  or  the  Chinese,  this  is  equally  so,  even  more  so,  as  be- 
tween well-developed  nations.  Nations  understand  one  another  as  little  as 
individuals  do  so.  Each  understands  merely  a self-created  picture  of  the  other, 
and  individuals  with  the  insight  to  penetrate  deeper  are  few  and  far  between. 
Vis-^-vis  the  Egyptians,  all  the  Classical  peoples  necessarily  felt  themselves 
as  relatives  in  one  whole,  but  as  betwem  themselves  they  never  understood  each 
other.  What  sharper  contrast  is  there  than  that  between  the  Athenian  and  the 
Spartan  spirit?  German,  French,  and  English  modes  of  philosophical  thinking 
are  distinct,  not  merely  in  Bacon,  Descartes,  and  Leibniz,  but  already  in  the 


171  ■ :■  :the  decline  of  the  west 

age  of  Scholasticism*  ^ and  even  now,  in  modern  physics  and  chemistry,  the 
scientific  method,  the  choice  and  type  of  experiments  and  hypotheses,  their  in- 
ter-relations, and  their  relative  importance  for  the  course  and  aim  of  the  investi- 
gation are  markedly  different  in  every  nation.  German  and  French  piety, 
English  and  Spanish  social  ethics,  German  and  English  habits  of  life,  stand  so 
far  apart  that  for  the  average  man,  and,  therefore,  for  the  public  opinion  of  his 
community  , the  real  inwardness  of  every  foreign  nation  remains  a deep  secret  and 
a source  of  continual  and  pregnant  error.  In  the  Roman  Empire  men  began 
generally  to  understand  one  another,  but  this  was  precisely  because  there  had 
ceased  to  be  anything  worth  understanding  in  the  Classical  city.  With  the 
advent  of  mutual  comprehension  this  particular  humanity  ceased  to  live  in 
nations,  and  ipso  jacto  ceased  to  be  historic.^ 

Owing  to  the  very  depth  of  these  experiences,  it  is  not  possible  for  a whole 
people  to  be  uniformly  and  throughout  a Culture-people,  a nation.  Amongst 
primitives  each  individual  man  has  the  same  feeling  of  group-obligations,  but 
the  awakening  of  a nation  into  self-consciousness  invariably  takes  place  in 
gradations  — * that  is,  pre-eminently  in  the  particular  class  that  is  strongest  of 
soul  and  holds  the  others  spellbound  by  a power  derived  from  what  it  has  ex- 
perienced. Every  nation  is  represented  in  history  by  a minority.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  springtime  it  is  the  nobility,^  which  in  that  period  of  its  first  appearance 
is  the  fine  flowering  of  the  people,  the  vessel  in  which  the  national  character  — 
unconscious,  but  felt  all  the  more  strongly  in  its  cosmic  pulse  — receives  its 
destined  Style.  The  “we**  is  the  knightly  class,  in  the  Egyptian  feudal  period 
of  1700  not  less  than  in  the  Indian  and  the  Chinese  of  i^oo.  The  Homeric 
heroes  are  the  Danai;  the  Norman  barons  England.  Centuries  later,  Saint- 
Simon — the  embodiment,  it  is  true,  of  an  older  France  — used  to  say  that 
“ all  France”  was  assembled  in  the  King’s  ante-room,  and  there  was  a time  in 
which  Rome  and  the  Senate  were  actually  identical.  With  the  advent  of  the 
town  the  burgher  becomes  the  vessel  of  nationality,  and  (as  we  should  expect 
from  the  growth  of  intellectuality)  of  a national  consciousness  that  it  gets 
from  the  nobility  and  carries  through  to  its  fulfilment.  Always  it  is  particular 
circles,  graduated  in  fine  shades,  that  in  the  name  of  the  people  live,  feel,  act,  and 
know  how  to  die,  but  these  circles  become  larger  and  larger.  In  the  eighteenth 
century  arose  the  Western  concept  of  the  Nation  which  sets  up  (and  on  occasion 
energetically  insists  upon)  the  claim  to  be  championed  by  everybody  without 
exception;  but  in  reality,  as  we  know,  the  emigres  were  just  as  convinced  as  the 
Jacobins  that  they  were  the  people,  the  representatives  of  the  French  nation. 
A Culture-people  which  is  coincident  with  “all”  does  not  exist  — this  is 
possible  only  in  primitive  and  fellaheen  peoples,  only  in  a mere  joint  being  with- 

1 Albertus  Magnus;  St.  Thomas  Aquinas;  Grosseteste,  and  Roger  Bacon.  — Tr. 

2 cf.  p.  105. 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  173 

ottt  depth  or  historical  dignity.  So  long  as  a people  is  a nation  and  works  out 
the  Destiny  of  a nation,  there  is  in  it  a minority  which  in  the  name  of  all  repre- 
sents and  fulfils  its  history. 

IV 

The  Classical  nations,  in  accordance  with  the  static-Euclidean  soul  of  their 
Culture,  were  corporeal  units  of  the  smallest  imaginable  size.  It  was  not 
Hellenes  or  lonians  that  were  nations,  but  in  each  city  the  Demos,  a union  of 
adult  men,  legally  and  hy  the  same  token  nationally  defined  between  the  type  of  the 
hero  as  upper  limit  and  the  slave  as  lower.  ^ Synoecism,  that  mysterious  process 
of  early  periods  in  which  the  inhabitants  of  a countryside  give  up  their  villages 
and  assemble  themselves  as  a town,  marks  the  moment  at  which,  having  arrived 
at  self-consciousness,  the  Classical  nation  constitutes  itself  as  such.  We  can  still 
trace  the  way  in  which  this  form  of  the  nation  steadily  makes  good  from 
Homeric  times  ^ to  the  epoch  of  the  great  colonizations.  It  responds  exactly  to 
the  Classical  prime-symbol:  each  folk  was  a body,  visible  and  survey  able,  a <T<hfxa, 
the  express  negation  of  the  idea  of  geographical  space. 

It  is  of  no  importance  to  Classical  history  whether  or  not  the  Etruscans  in 
Italy  were  identical  physically  or  linguistically  with  the  bearers  of  this  name 
amongst  the  ‘'Sea-peoples,’*  or  what  the  relation  was  between  the  pre-Homeric 
units  of  the  Pelasgi  or  Danai  and  the  later  bearers  of  the  Doric  or  the  Hellenic 
name.  If,  about  1100,  there  are  Doric  and  Etruscan  primitive  peoples  (as  is 
probable),  nevertheless  a Doric  or  an  Etruscan  nation  never  existed.  In  Tuscany  as 
in  the  Peloponnese  there  were  only  City-states,  national  pints  which  in  the 
period  of  colonization  could  only  multifly ^ never  exfand.  The  Etruscan  wars  of 
Rome  were  always  waged  against  one  or  more  cities,^  and  the  nations  that  the 
Persians  and  the  Carthaginians  confronted  were  of  this  same  type.  To  speak  of 
“ the  Greeks  and  the  Romans”  as  the  eighteenth  century  did  (and  as  we  still  do) 
is  completely  erroneous.  A Greek  “nation”  in  our  sense  is  a misconception  — 
the  Greeks  themselves  never  knew  such  an  idea  at  all.  The  name  of  “ Hellenes,” 
which  arose  about  500,  did  not  denote  a people,  but  the  aggregate  of  Classical 
Culture-men,  the  sum  of  their  nations,^  in  contradistinction  to  the  “Barbarian” 
world.  And  the  Romans,  a true  urban  people,  could  not  conceive  of  their 

^ See  p.  60  above.  The  slave  did  not  belong  to  the  nation.  On  this  account  the  enrolment 
of  non-citizens  in  the  army  of  a city,  which  on  occasions  of  dire  crisis  was  inevitable,  was  always 
felt  as  a profound  blow  to  the  national  idea. 

2 Even  in  the  Iliad  we  can  perceive  the  tendency  to  the  nation-feeling  in  the  small,  and  even 
the  smallest,  aggregates. 

2 And  she  had  rarely  to  deal  with  anything  more  formidable  than  a loose  partial  confederacy. 
Often  Etruscan  cities  were  in  alliance  with  Rome  against  other  Etruscan  cities.  — Tn 

It  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  both  Plato  and  Aristotle  in  their  political  writings  were  unable 
to  conceive  of  the  ideal  people  otherwise  than  in  the  Polis-form.  But  it  was  equally  natural  for  the 
eighteenth-century  thinkers  to  regard  “the  Ancients’'  as  nations  after  the  fashion  of  Shaftesbury 
and  Montesquieu  — it  is  we  their  successors  who  ought  not  to  have  stayed  on  that  note. 


^74^:  ^ DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

Empire  otherwise  than  in  the  form  of  innumerable  nation-points,  the  chimes. 
into  which,  juridically  as  in  other  respects,  they  dissolved  all  the  primitive 
peoples  of  their  Imperium.  ^ When  national  feeling  in  fhis  shape  is  extinguished, 
there  is  an  end  to  Classical  history. 

It  will  be  the  task  — one  of  the  heaviest  tasks  of  historians  •— to  trace, 
generation  by  generation,  the  quiet  fading-out  of  the  Classical  nations  in  the 
eastern  Mediterranean  during  the  “Late  Classical’ ' age,  and  the  ever  stronger 
inflow  of  a new  nation-spirit,  the  Magian. 

A nation  of  the  Magian  type  is  the  community  of  co-believers,  the  group  of 
all  who  know  the  right  way  to  salvation  and  are  inwardly  linked  to  one  another 
by  the  ijma  ^ of  this  belief.  Men  belonged  to  a Classical  nation  by  virtue  of  the 
possession  of  citizenship,  but  to  a Magian  nation  by  virtue  of  a sacramental 
act  — circumcision  for  the  Jews,  specific  forms  of  baptism  for  the  Mandaeans 
or  the  Christians.  An  unbeliever  was  for  a Magian  folk  what  an  alien  was  for 
a Classical  — no  intercourse  with  him,  no  connubium  — and  this  national 
separation  went  so  far  that  in  Palestine  a Jewish-Aramaic  and  a Christian- 
Aramaic  dialect  formed  themselves  side  by  side.^  The  Faustian  nation,  though 
necessarily  bound  up  with  a particular  religiousness,  is  not  so  with  a particular 
confession;  the  Classical  nation  is  by  type  non-exclusive  in  its  relations  to 
different  cults;  but  the  Magian  nation  comprises  neither  more  nor  less  than  is  covered 
by  the  idea  of  one  or  another  of  the  Magian  Churches,  Inwardly  the  Classical  nation 
is  linked  with  the  city,  and  the  Western  with  a landscape,  but  the  Arabian 
knows  neither  fatherland  nor  mother  tongue.  Outwardly  its  specific  world- 
outlook  is  only  expressed  by  the  distinctive  script  which  each  such  nation  de- 
velops as  soon  as  it  is  born.  But  for  that  very  reason  the  inwardness  and  hidden 
force  — the  magic,  in  fact  — of  a Magian  nation-feeling  impresses  us  Faustians, 
who  notice  the  absence  of  the  home-idea,  as  something  entirely  enigmatic  and 
uncanny.  This  tacit,  self-secure  cohesion  (that  of  the  Jews,  for  example,  in  the 
homes  of  the  Western  peoples)  is  what  entered  “Roman  Law”  (called  by  a 
Classical  label  but  worked  out  by  Aramceans)  as  the  concept  of  the  “ juridical  per- 
son,” ^ which  is  nothing  but  the  Magian  notion  of  a community.  Post-exilic 
Judaism  was  a juridical  person  long  before  anyone  had  discovered  the  concept 
itself. 

The  primitives  who  preceded  this  evolution  were  predominantly  tribal 
associations,  among  them  the  South-Arabian  Minaeans,^  who  appear  about  the 
beginning  of  the  first  millennium,  and  whose  name  vanishes  in  the  first  century 

^ Mommsen  described  the  Roman  Empire  as  a “universal  Empire  founded  upon  municipal  au- 
tonomy." And  even  Alexander’s  empire  was  originally  conceived,  and  to  a great  extent  actually 
organised,  in  this  spirit.  See  P.  Jouguet,  UImpSrtalism  macidonien  (192.6),  Ch.  IV,  — Tr. 

^ See  p.  67. 

® F.  N.  Finck,  Die  S^rachstdmme  des  Erdkreises  (1915),  pp.  ^9,  et  seq. 

^ About  the  end  of  the  second  century  of  our  era. 

® See  foot-note,  p.  197,  et  seq,  — Tr. 


■ PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  175' 

before  Clirist;  the  Aramaic-speaking  Chaldeans,  who,  likewise  about  1000  b.c,, 
sprang  up  as  clan-groups  and  from  659  to  539  ruled  the  Babylonian  world;  the 
Israelites  before  the  Exile;  ^ and  the  Persians  of  Cyrus. ^ So  strongly  already  the 
populations  felt  this  form  that  the  priesthoods  which  developed  here,  there, 
and  everywhere  after  the  time  of  Alexander  received  the  names  of  foundered  or 
fictitious  tribes.  Amongst  the  Jews  and  the  South- Arabian  Sabaeans  they  were 
called  Levites;  amongst  the  Medes  and  Persians,  Magi  (after  an  extinct  Indian 
tribe);  and  amongst  the  adherents  of  the  new  Babylonian  religion  Chaldeans 
(also  after  a disintegrated  clan-grouping),^  But  here,  as  in  all  other  Cultures, 
the  energy  of  the  national  consensus  completely  overrode  the  old  tribal  arrange- 
ments of  the  primitives.  Just  as  the  Populus  Romanus  unquestionably  contained 
folk-elements  of  very  varied  provenance,  and  as  the  nation  of  the  French  took 
in  Salian  Franks  and  Romanic  and  Old  Celtic  natives  alike,  so  the  Magian  na- 
tion also  ceased  to  regard  origin  as  a distinguishing  mark.  The  process,  of 
course,  was  an  exceedingly  long  one.  The  tribe  still  counts  for  much  with  the 
Jews  of  the  Maccabean  period  and  even  with  the  Arabs  of  the  first  Caliphs; 
but  for  the  inwardly  ripened  Culture-peoples  of  this  world,  such  as  the  Jews 
of  the  Talmudic  period,  it  no  longer  possessed  any  meaning.  He  who  belongs 
to  the  Faith  belongs  to  the  Nation  — it  would  have  been  blasphemy  even  to 
admit  any  other  distinction.  In  early  Christian  times  the  Prince  of  Adiabene  ^ 
went  over  to  Judaism  with  his  people  in  a body,  and  they  were  zll  if  so  faefo 
incorporated  in  the  Jewish  nation.  The  same  applies  to  the  nobility  of  Armenia 
and  even  the  Caucasian  tribes  (which  at  that  period  must  have  Judaized  on  a 
large  scale)  and,  in  the  opposite  direction,  to  the  Beduins  of  Arabia,  right  down 
to  the  extreme  south,  and  beyond  them  again  to,  African  tribes  as  far  afield  as 
Lake  Chad.^  Here  evidently  is  a national  common  feeling  proof  even  against 
such  race-distinctions  as  these.  It  is  stated  that  even  to-day  Jews  can  amongst 
themselves  distinguish  very  different  races  at  the  first  glance,  and  that  in  the 
ghettos  of  eastern  Europe  the  “tribes' ((in  the  Old  Testament  sense)  are  clearly 
recognized.  But  none  of  this  constitutes  a difference  of  nation.  According  to 
von  Erckert  ^ the  West-European  Jew-type  is  universally  distributed  within  the 
non-Jewish  Caucasian  peoples,  whereas  according  to  Weissenberg  it  does  not 
occur  at  all  amongst  the  long-headed  Jews  of  southern  Arabia,  where  the 

^ A ioose  group  of  Edomite  tribes  which,  with  Moabites,  Amalekites,  Ishmaelites,  and  others, 
thus  constituted  a fairly  uniform  Hebrew-speaking  population. 

® See  p.  167. 

^ Aristotle  says  that  “philosophers  arc  called  Calani  among  the  Indians,  and  Jews  among 
the  Syrians.”  Exactly  the  same  is  stated  by  Megasthenes,  the  Seleucid  ambassador  at  Pataliputra, 
of  Brahmins  and  Jews.  — Tr. 

^ The  district  south  of  Lake  Van,  of  which  the  capital  was  Arbela,  the  old  home  of  the  goddess 
Ishtar.  ^ 

® As  evidenced  by  the  Falasha,  the  black  Jews  of  Abyssinia. 

« Arch.  f.  Anthrop.,  Vol,  XIX. 

^ Zeitschr.  f.  EthnoL  (1919). 


r THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

Sabasan  tomb-sculptures  show  a human  type  that  might  almost  claim  to  be 
Roman  or  Germanic  and  is  the  ancestor  of  these  Jews  who  were  converted  by 
missionary  effort  at  least  by  the  birth  of  Christ. 

But  this  resolution  of  the  tribal  primitives  into  the  Magian  nations  of  Per- 
sians,  Jews,  Mandasans,  Christians,  and  the  rest  must  have  occurred  quite 
generally  and  on  an  immense  scale.  I have  already  drawn  attention  to  the  deci- 
sive fact  that  long  before  the  beginning  of  our  era  the  Persians  represented  simply 
a religious  community,  and  it  is  certain  that  their  numbers  were  indefinitely  in- 
creased by  accessions  to  the  Mazdaist  faith.  The  Babylonian  religion  vanished 
at  that  time  — which  means  that  its  adherents  became  in  part  Jews  and  in  part 
Persians  — but,  emerging  from  it  there  is  a new  religion,  inwardly  alien  to  both 
Jewish  and  Persian,  an  astral  religion,  which  bears  the  name  of  the  Chaldees 
and  whose  adherents  constituted  a genuine  Aramaic-speaking  nation.  From 
this  Aramsean  population  of  Chaldean-Jewish-Persian  nationality  came,  firstly 
the  Babylonian  Talmud,  the  Gnosis,  and  the  religion  of  Mani,  and  secondly, 
in  Islamic  times,  Sufism  and  the  Shia. 

Moreover,  as  seen  from  Edessa,  the  inhabitants  of  the  Classical  world,  they 
also,  appear  as  nations  in  the  Magian  style.  “ The  Greeks  ’ ’ in  the  Eastern  idiom 
means  the  aggregate  of  all  who  adhered  to  the  Syncretic  cults  and  were  bound 
together  by  the  ijma  of  the  Late  Classical  religiousness.  The^Hellenistic  city- 
nations  are  no  longer  in  the  picture,  which  shows  only  one  community  of  be- 
lievers, the  ‘‘worshippers  of  the  mysteries,”  who  under  the  names  of  Helios, 
Jupiter,  Mithras,  ^eos  u^tcrros,  worshipped  a kind  of  Yahweh  or  Allah. 
Throughout  the  East,  Greekness  is  a definite  religious  notion,  and  for  that  mat- 
ter one  completely  concordant  with  the  facts  as  they  then  were.  The  feeling 
of  the  Polls  is  almost  extinct,  and  a Magian  nation  needs  neither  home  nor 
community  of  origin.  Even  the  Hellenism  of  the  Seleucid  Empire,  which  made 
converts  in  Turkestan  and  on  the  Indus,  was  related  in  inward  form  to  Persian 
and  post-exilic  Judaism.  Later,  the  Aramxan  Porphyry,  the  pupil  of  Plotinus, 
attempted  to  organize  this  Greekness  as  a cult-Church  on  the  modM  of  the 
Christian  and  the  Persian,  and  the  Emperor  Julian  raised  it  to  the  dignity  of 
being  the  State  Church  — an  act  not  merely  religious,  but  also  and  above  all 
national.  When  a Jew  sacrificed  to  Sol  or  to  Apollo,  he  thereby  became  a Greek. 
So,  for  example  Ammonias  Saccas  (d.  xqx),  the  teacher  of  Plotinus  and  probably 
also  of  Origen,  went  over  “from  the  Christians  to  the  Greeks”;  so  also  Por- 
phyry, born  Malchus  and  (like  the  “Roman”  jurist  Ulpian)  ^ a Phoenician  of 
Tyre.^  In  these  cases  we  see  jurists  and  State  officials  taking  Latin,  and  phi- 
losophers Greek,  names  — and  for  the  philological  spirit  of  modern  and  religious 
research,  this  is  quite  historical  enough  to  justify  these  men’s  being  regarded 

^ Digesta,  50,  15. 

2 Gcffckcn,  Der  Ausgang  des  griech,-^dm,  Meidentitm  (1910),  p.  57  [English  readers  may  refer  to 
the  article  “Neoplatonism”  and  shorter  articles  under  the  personal  names,  in  Ency.  XI  cd.  — 

T..] 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  177 

as  Roman  and  Greek  in  the  Classical  city-national  sense!  But  how  many  of 
the  great  Alexandrines  may  have  been  Greeks  only  in  the  Magian  sense  of  the 
term?  In  point  of  birth  were  not  Plotinus  and  Diophantus^  perhaps  Jews  or 
Chaldeans? 

Now,  the  Christians  also  felt  themselves  from  the  outset  a$  a nation  of  the 
Magian  cast,  and,  moreover,  the  others,  Greeks  (“heathen’*)  and  Jews  alike, 
regarded  them  as  such.  Quite  logically  the  latter  considered  their  secession  from 
Judaism  as  high  treason,  and  the  former  their  missionary  infiltration  into  the 
Classical  cities  as  an  invasion  and  conquest,  while  the  Christians,  on  their  side, 
designated  people  of  other  faiths  as  rd  When  the  Monophysites  and 

the  Nestorians  separated  themselves  from  the  Orthodox,  new  nations  came  into 
being  as  well  as  new  Churches.  The  Nestorians  since  1450  have  been  governed 
by  the  Mar  Shimun,®  who  was  at  once  prince  and  patriarch  of  his  people  and, 
vis-^-vis  the  Sultan,  occupied  exactly  the  same  position  as,  long  before,  the 
Jewish  Resh  Galutha  had  occupied  in  the  Persian  Empire.^  This  nation-con- 
sciousness, derived  from  particular  and  defined  world-feeling  and  therefore  self- 
evident  with  an  a priori  sureness,  cannot  be  ignored  if  we  are  to  understand  the 
later  persecutions  of  the  Christians.  The  Magian  State  is  inseparably  bound  up 
with  the  concept  of  orthodoxy.  Caliphate,  nation,  and  Church  form  an  intimate 
unit.  It  was  as  that  Adiabene  went  over  to  Judaism,  Osrhoene  about  100 
(so  soon !)  from  Greekdom  to  Christendom,  Armenia  in  the  sixth  century  from 
the  Greek  to  the  Monophysite  Church.  Each  of  these  events  expresses  the  fact 
that  the  State  was  identical  with  the  orthodox  community  as  a juridical  person.^ 
If  Christians  lived  in  the  Islamic  State,  Nestorians  in  the  Persian,  Jews  in  the 
Byzantine,  they  did  not  and  could  not  as  unbelievers  belong  to  it,  and  conse- 
quently were  thrown  back  upon  their  own  jurisdictions.®  If  by  reason  of  their 
numbers  or  their  missionary  spirit  they  became  a threat  to  the  continuance 

^ See  Vol.  I,  pp.  63,  71.  — Tr. 

2 Which  we  translate  by  “Gentiles,*'  but  which  literally  means  “the  nations’*  or  “peo- 
ples.”— Tr,  ,, 

® See  the  article  “Nestorians,”  Ency.  Brit.y  XI  cd.  — Tr. 

^ See  the  articles  “Jews  ” (§  43),  “Exilarch,”  and  “Gaon,”  Ency.  Brit.,  XI.  ed.  In  Europe,  too, 
far  into  the  Dispersion,  there  are  rabbis  recognized  by  the  State  as  governors  of  their  communities, 
such  as  the  famous  Rabbi  Low  of  Prague  (1513-1609).  — Tr. 

® It  may  not  be  at  all  fanciful  to  connect  the  Reception  of  “Roman”  law  in  Germany  and  the 
rise  of  the  doctrine  of  cujus  regio,  ejus  rtUgio  which  played  so  great  a part  in  the  religious  wars  and 
treaties  of  our  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.  At  any  rate,  “practical  politics”  so-called  pro- 
vides an  inadequate  motive  by  itself  to  ^account  for  the  latter.  Considering  it  in  contrast  to  the 
notion  of  Mortmain,  and  having  regard  to  the  intensity  of  religious  belief  in  many  of  the  princes 
who  applied  it,  the  idea  appears  as  something  much  more  positive  than  a mere  formula  of  com- 
promise. — Tr. 

® See  p.  70.  The  “capitulations”  under  which  until  recently  Europeans  were  exempt  from 
the  jurisdiction  of  Turkish  courts  are  regarded  nowadays  as  a right  enforced  by  more  civilized  pow- 
ers to  protect  their  subjects  from  the  laws  of  a less  civilized  state,  and  their  abolition  is  a symbol 
of  the  rise  of  the  latter  to  the  rank  of  a civilized  power.  But  originally  it  was  quite  the  reverse. 
The  first  “capitulation”  was  sued  for  by  France  in  an  hour  of  danger  when  Turkish  aid  was  essen- 
tial to  her.  See  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.,  article  “Capitulations,**  — Tr. 


178'  : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

of  the  identity  of  state  and  creed-community,  persecution  became  a national 
duty.  It  was  on  this  account  that  first  the  orthodox'’  (or  “Greek”)  and  then 
the  Nestorian  Christians  suffered  in  the  Persian  Empire.  Diocletian  also,  who. 
as  “Caliph”  ^ (Domims  et  Deus)  had  linked  the  Imperium  with  the  pagan  cult- 
Churches  and  saw  himself  in  all  sincerity  as  Commander  of  these  VmMuI, 
could  not  evade  the  duty  of  suppressing  the  second  Church.  Constantine 
changed  the  “ true”  Church  and  in  that  act  changed  the  nationality  of  the  Byzantine 
Empire.  From  that  point  on,  the  Greek  name  slowly  passed  over  to  the  Chris- 
tian nation,  and  specifically  to  that  Christian  nation  which  the  Emperor  as 
Head  of  the  Faithful  recognized  and  allowed  to  sit  in  the  Great  Councils. 
Hence  the  uncertain  lines  of  the  picture  of  Byzantine  history  — in  z9o  the  or- 
ganization that  of  a Classical  Imperium,  but  the  substance  already  a Magian 
national  state;  in  31^  a change  of  nationality  without  change  of  name.  Under 
this  name  of  “Greeks,”  first  Paganism  as  a nation  fought  the  Christians,  and 
then  Christianity  as  a nation  fought  Islam.  And  in  the  latter  fight,  Islam  itself 
being  a nation  also  (the  Arabian),  nationality  stamped  itself  more  and  more 
deeply  upon  events.  Hence  the  present-day  Greeks  are  a creation  of  the  Magian 
Culture,  developed  first  by  the  Christian  Church,  then  by  the  sacred  language 
of  this  Church,  and  finally  by  the  name  of  this  Church.  Islam  brought  with  it 
from  the  home  of  Mohammed  the  Arab  name  as  the  badge  of  its  nationality. 
It  is  a mistake  to  equate  these  “Arabs”  with  the  Beduin  tribes  of  the  desert. 
What  created  the  new  nation,  with  its  passionate  and  strongly  characteristic 
soul,  was  the  consensus  of  the  new  faith.  Its,  unity  is  no  more  derived  from  race 
and  home  than  that  of  the  Christian,  Jewish,  or  Persian,  and  therefore  it  did 
not  “migrate”;  rather  it  owes  its  immense  expansion  to  the  incorporation 
within  itself  of  the  greater  part  of  the  early  Magian  nations.  With  the  end  of 
the  first  millennium  of  our  era  these  nations  one  and  ail  pass  over  into  the  form 
of  fellah-peoples,  and  it  is  as  fellaheen  that  the  Christian  peoples  of  the 
Balkans  under  Turkish  rule,  the  Parsees  in  India,  and  the  Jews  in  Western  Europe 
have  lived  ever  since.^ 

In  the  West,  nations  of  Faustian  style  emerge,  more  and  more  distinctly,  from 
the  time  of  Otto  the  Great  (936-973),  and  in  them  the  primitive  peoples  of  the 
Carolingian  period  are  swiftly  dissolved.^  Already  by  a.d.  1000  the  men  who 

^ See  Voi.  L,  p.  xiz. 

^ The  author’s  meaning  may  perhaps  be  prcdscd  thus:  so  much  of  the  old  Magian  nations  as 
was  not  Arabized  became  fellah  peoples,  either  outside  the*  Magian  sphere  (as  in  Europe  and  India) 
or  within  it,  under  the  Turkish  (Mongol)  domination,  but  even  the  old  Arab-eiement  itself  was 
largely  ripe  for  the  change  into  the  fellah  condition  when  the  Turks  came.  — Tr. 

® I am  convinced  that  the  nations  of  China  which  sprang  up  in  members  in  the  middle,  Hwang- 
Ho  region  at  the  beginning  of  the  Chou  dynasty,  as  also  the  regional  peoples  of  the  Egyptian  Old 
Kingdom  (which  had  each  its  own  capital  and  its  own  religion,  and  as  late  as  Roman  times  fought 
each  other  in  definitely  religious  wars),  were  in  their  inward  form  more  closely  akin  to  the  peoples 
of  the  West  than  to  those  of  the  Classical  and  the  Arabian  worlds.  However,  research  into  such 
fields  has  hitherto  been  conspicuous  by  its  absence. 


PRIMITIVES,  XULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  179 

** mattered  most”  were  everTwhere  beginning  to  sense  themselves  as  Germans, 
Italians,  Spaniards,  Frenchmen;  whereas  hardly  six  generations  earlier  their 
ancestors  had  been  to  the  depths  of  their  souls  Franks,  Lombards,  and  Visi- 
goths. 

The  people-form  of  this  Culture  is  founded,  like  its  Gothic  architecture 
and  its  Infinitesimal  Calculus  upon  a tendency  to  the  Infinite,  in  the  spatial  as 
well  as  the  temporal  sense.  The  nation-feeling  comprises,  to  begin  with,  a 
geographical  horizon  that,  considering  the  period  and  its  means  of  communica- 
tion, can  only  be  called  vast,  and  is  not  paralleled  in  any  other  Culture.  The 
fatherland  as  extent^  as  a region  whose  boundaries  the  individual  has  scarcely, 
if  ever,  seen  and  which  nevertheless  he  will  defend  and  die  for,  is  something  that 
in  its  symbolic  depth  and  force  men  of  other  Cultures  can  never  comprehend. 
The  Magian  nation  does  not  as  such  possess  an  earthly  home;  the  Classical 
possesses  it  only  as  a point-focus.  The  actuality  that,  even  in  Gothic  times, 
united  men  from  the  banks  of  the  Adige  with  men  in  the  Order-castles  of  Lith- 
uania in  an  association  of  feeling  would  have  been  inconceivable  even  in  ancient 
China  and  ancient  Egypt,  and  stands  in  the  sharpest  opposition  to  the  actuality 
of  Rome  and  Athens,  where  every  member  of  the  Demos  had  the  rest  constantly 
in  sight. 

Still  stronger  is  the  sensitivity  to  distance  in  time.  Before  the  fatherland- 
idea  (which  is  a consequence  of  the  existence  of  the  nation)  emerged  at  all,  this 
passion  evolved  another  idea  to  which  the  Faustian  nations  owe  that  existence 
— the  dynastic  idea.  Faustian  peoples  are  historical  peoples,  communities  that 
feel  themselves  bound  together  not  by  place  or  consensus,  but  by  history;  and 
the  eminent  symbol  and  vessel  of  the  common  Destiny  is  the  ruling  “house.” 
For  Egyptian  and  for  Chinese  mankind  the  dynasty  is  a symbol  of  quite  other 
meaning.  Here  what  it  signifies,  as  a will  and  an  activity,  is  Time,  All  that 
we  have  been,  all  that  we  would  be,  is  manifested  in  the  being  of  the  one  gener- 
ation; and  our  sense  of  this  is  much  too  profound  to  be  upset  by  the  worthless- 
ness of  a regent.  What  matters  is  not  the  person,  but  the  idea,  and  it  is  for  the 
sake  of  the  idea  that  thousands  have  so  often  marched  to  their  deaths  with 
conviction  in  a genealogical  quarrel.  Classical  history  was  for  Classical  eyes 
only  a chain  of  incidents  leading  from  moment  to  moment;  Magian  history 
was  for  its  members  the  progressive  actualization  in  and  through  mankind 
of  a world-plan  laid  down  by  God  and  accomplished  between  a creation  and  a 
cataclysm;  but  Faustian  history  is  in  our  eyes  a single  grand  willing  of  conscious 
logic,  in  the  accomplishment  of  which  nations  are  led  and  represented  by  their 
rulers.  It  is  a trait  of  race.  Rational  foundations  it  has  not  and  cannot  have  — 
it  has  simply  been  felt  so,  and  because  it  has  been  felt  so,  the  companion-trust  of 
the  Germanic  migration-time  developed  on  into  the  feudal  troth  of  the  Gothic, 
the  loyalty  of  the  Baroque,  and  the  merely  seemingly  undynastic  patriotism  oJ 
the  nineteenth  century.  We  must  not  misjudge  the  depth  and  dignity  of  this 


i8o  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

•feeling  because  there  is  an  endless  catalogue  of  perjured  vassals  and  peoples  ^ and 
an  eternal  comedy  in  the  cringing  of  courtiers  and  the  abjectness  of  the  vulgar. 
All  great  symbols  are  spiritual  and  can  be  comprehended  only  in  their  highest 
forms.  The  private  life  of  a pope  bears  no  relation  to  the  idea  of  the  Papacy. 
Henry  the  Lion’s  very  defection  ^ shows  how  fully  in  a time  of  nation-forming 
a real  ruler  feels  the  destiny  of  “ his”  people  incorporated  in  himself.  He  repre- 
sents that  destiny  in  the  face  of  history,  and  at  times  it  costs  him  his  honour  to 
do  so. 

Ail  nations  of  the  West  are  of  dynastic  origins.  In  the  Romanesque  and  even 
in  Early  Gothic  architecture  the  soul  of  the  Carolingian  primitives  still  quivers 
through.  There  is  no  French  or  German  Gothic,  but  Salian,  Rhenish,  and 
Suabian,  as  there  is  Visigothic  (northern  Spain,  southern  France)  and  Lom- 
bard and  Saxon  Romanesque.  But  over  it  all  there  spreads  soon  the  minority, 
composed  of  men  of  race,  that  feels  membership  in  a nation  as  a great  historical 
vocation.  From  it  proceed  the  Crusades,  and  in  them  there  truly  were  French 
and  German  chivalries.  It  is  the  hall-mark  of  Faustian  peoples  that  they  are 
conscious  of  the  direction  of  their  history.  But  this  direction  attaches. to  the 
sequence  of  the  generations,  and  so  the  nature  of  the  race-ideal  is  genealogical 
through  and  through  — Darwinism,  even,  with  its  theories  of  descent  and  in- 
heritance is  a sort  of  caricature  of  Gothic  heraldry  — and  the  world-as-history, 
when  every  individual  lives  in  the  plane  of  it,  contains  not  only  the  tree  of  the 
individual  family,  ruling  or  other,  but  also  the  tree  of  the  people  as  the  basic 
form  of  all  its  happenings.®  It  needs  very  exact  observation  to  perceive  that  this 
Faustian-genealogical  principle,  with  its  eminently  historical  notions  of 
**  Ebenburtigkeif'  (equivalence  by  virtue  of  birth)  and  of  purity  of  blood,  is  just 
as  alien  to  the  Egyptians  and  Chinese,  for  all  their  historical  disposition,  as  it 
is  to  the  Roman  nobility  and  the  Byzantine  Empire.  On  the  other  hand,  neither 
our  peasantry  nor  the  patriciate  of  the  cities  is  conceivable  without  it.  The 
scientific  conception  of  the  people,  which  I have  dissected  above,  is  derived 
essentially  from  the  genealogical  sense  of  the  Gothic  period.  The  notion  that 
the  peoples  have  their  trees  has  made  the  Italians  proud  to  be  the  heirs  of  Rome, 
and  the  Germans  proud  to  recall  their  Teuton  forefathers,  and  that  is  something 
quite  different  from  the  Classical  belief  in  timeless  descent  from  heroes  and  gods. 

^ That  the  dynasts  themselves  have  contributed  heavily  to  the  catalogue  of  perjury  and  bad  faith 
only  rcmforccs  the  argument. — Tr. 

2 His  desertion  of  the  emperor  Frederick  Barbarossa  iu  the  Lombard  war,  1176.  The  details  of 
the  long  struggle  between  Frederick  and  Heury  will  be  found  in  any  fairly  full  history  of  Europe 
or  in  the  respective  articles  devoted  to  them  m thc  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.  While  Frederick  stood  — and 
with  real  hopes  as  well  as  ideals  — for  the  mclusive  Empire,  Henry  through  all  his  vicissitudes  stood 
for  Germany’s  eastern  expansion,  the  colonization  of  the  Slavonic  north-cast,  and  the  development 
of  the  Baltic.  — Tr. 

® In  mediseval  hymns  the  cross  is  symbolically  regarded  as  a tree  bearing  Christ  as  its  last  and 
grandest  fruit;  it  is  identified,  indeed,  with  the  Tree  of  Knowledge.  (See  Yrjo  Him,  The  Sacred 
Shrine.')  — Tr. 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  i8i  , 

And  eventually,  when  after  1783  the  notion  of  mother  tongue  came  to  be  fitted  |! 

on  to  the  dynastic  principle,  the  once  merely  scientific  fancy  of  a primitive 
Indogermanic  people  transformed  itself  into  a deeply  felt  genealogy  of  “ the 
Aryan  race,’*  and  in  the  process  the  word  “race”  became  almost  a designation 
for  Destiny. ' 

But  the  “races**  of  the  West  are  not  the  creators  of  the  great  nations,  but 
their  result.  Not  one  of  them  had  yet  come  into  existence  in  Carolingian  times. 

It  was  the  class-ideal  of  chivalry  that  worked  creatively  in  different  ways  upon 
Germany,  England,  France,  and  Spain  and  impressed  upon  an  immense  area  that 
which  within  the  individual  nations  is  felt  and  experienced  as  race.  On  this 
rest  (as  I have  said  before)  the  nations  — so  historical,  so  alien  to  the  Classical 
— of  equivalence  by  birth  Qpeer-2igc,  Ebenburti^eit)  and  blood-purity.  It  was 
because  the  blood  of  the  ruling  family  incorporated  the  destiny,  the  being,  of 
the  whole  nation,  that  the  state-system  of  the  Baroque  was  of  genealogical 
structure  and  that  most  of  the  grand  crises  assumed  the  form  of  wars  of  dynastic 
succession.  Even  the  catastrophic  ruin  of  Napoleon,  which  settled  the  world’s 
political  organization  for  a century,  took  its  shape  from  the  fact  than  an  ad- 
venturer dared  to  drive  out  with  his  blood  that  of  the  old  dynasties,  and  that 
his  attack  upon  a symbol  made  it  historically  a sacred  duty  to  resist  him.  For 
all  these  peoples  were  the  consequence  of  dynastic  destinies.  That  there  is  a 
Portuguese  people,  and  a Portuguese  Brazil  in  the  midst  of  Spanish  America, 
is  the  result  of  the  marriage  of  Count  Henry  of  Burgundy  in  1095.  That  there 
are  Swiss  and  Hollanders  is  the  result  of  a reaction  against  the  House  of  Habs- 
burg.  That  Lorraine  is  the  name  of  a land  and  not  of  a people  is  an  consequence 
of  the  childlessness  of  Lothar  11. 

It  was  the  Kaiser-idea  that  welded  the  disjunct  primitives  of  Charlemagne’s 
time  into  the  German  nation.  Germany  and  Empire  are  inseparable  ideas. 

The  fall  of  the  Hohenstaufens  meant  the  replacement  of  one  great  dynasty  by 
a handful  of  small  and  tiny  ones;  and  the  German  nation  of  Gothic  style  was 
inwardly  shattered  even  before  the  beginning  of  the  Baroque  — that  is,  at  the 
very  time  when  the  nation-idea  was  being  raised  to  higher  levels  of  intellect  in 
leader-cities  like  Paris,  Madrid,  London,  and  Vienna.  The  Thirty  Years’  War, 
so  conventional  history  says,  destroyed  Germany  in  its  flower.  Not  so;  the 
fact  that  it  could  occur  at  all  in  this  wretched  form  simply  confirmed  and  showed 
up  a long-completed  decadence — it  was  the  final  consequence  of  the  fail  of 
the  Hohenstaufens.  There  could  hardly  be  a more  convincing  proof  that 
Faustian  nations  are  dynastic  units.  But  then  again,  the  Salians  and  the  Hohen- 
staufens created  also  — at  least  in  idea  — an  Italian  nation  out  of  Romans, 

Lombards,  and  Normans.  Only  the  Empire  made  it  possible  for  them  to  stretch 
a hand  back  to  the  age  of  Rome.  Even  though  alien  power  evoked  the  hostility 
of  the  townsmen,  and  split  the  two  primary  orders,  the  nobles  to  the  Emperor, 
the  priests  to  the  Pope;  even  though  in  these  conflicts  of  Guelph  and  Ghibcliinc 


i8x  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

the  nobility  soon  lost  its  importance  and  the  Papacy  rose  through  the  anti- 
dynastic  cities  to  political  supremacy;  even  though  at  the  last  there  was  but  a 
tangle  of  predatory  states  whose  “ Renaissance ' ^-politics  opposed  the  soaring 
world-policy  of  the  Gothic  Empire,  as  Milan  of  old  had  defied  the  will  of 
Frederick  Batbarossa  — yet  the  ideal  of  Una  Italia^  the  ideal  for  which  Dante 
sacrificed  the  peace  of  his  life,  was  a pure  dynastic  creation  of  the  great  German 
emperors.  The  Renaissance,  whose  historical  horizon  was  that  of  the  urban 
patriciate,  led  the  nation  as  far  out  of  the  path  of  self-fulfilment  as  it  is  possible 
to  imagine.  Ail  through  the  Baroque  and  Rococo  the  land  was  depressed  to  the 
state  of  being  a mere  pawn  in  the  power-politics  of  alien  houses.  And  not  until 
after  1800  did  Romanticism  arise  and  reawaken  the  Gothic  feeling  with  an  in- 
tensity that  made  of  it  a political  power. 

The  French  people  was  forged  out  of  Franks  and  Visigoths  by  its  kings.  It 
learned  to  feel  itself  as  a whole  for  the  first  time  at  Bouvines  in  1x14.^  Still 
more  significant  is  the  creation  of  the  House  of  Habsburg,  which,  out  of  a 
population  linked  neither  by  speech  nor  folk-feeling  nor  tradition  caused  to 
arise  the  Austrian  nation,  which  proved  its  nationhood  in  defending  Maria 
Theresa  and  in  resisting  Napoleon  - — its  first  tests,  and  its  last.  The  political 
history  of  the  Baroque  age  is  in  essentials  the  history  of  the  Houses  of  Bourbon 
and  Habsburg.  The  rise  of  the  House  of  Wettin  in  place  of  that  of  Welf  is  the 
reason  why  ** Saxony’'  was  on  the  Weser  in  800,  and  is  on  the  Elbe  to-day. 
Dynastic  events,  and  finally  the  intervention  of  Napoleon,  brought  it  about  that 
half  of  Bavaria  has  shared  in  the  history  of  Austria  and  that  the  Bavarian  State 
consists  for  the  most  part  of  Franconia  and  Suabia. 

The  latest  nation  of  the  West  is  the  Prussian,  a creation  of  the  Hohenzollerns 
as  the  Roman  was  the  last  creation  of  the  Classical  Polis-feeling,  and  the  Arabian 
the  last  product  of  a religious  consensus . At  Fehbellin  ^ the  young  nation  gained 
its  recognition;  at  Rossbach  ^ it  won  for  Germany.  It  was  Goethe  who  with 
his  infallible  eye  for  historic  turning-points  described  the  then  new  “Minna  von 
Barnhelm”  as  the  first  German  poetry  of  specifically  national  content.  It  is  one 
more  example,  and  a deeply  significant  one,  to  show  how  dynastically  the 
Western  nations  defined  themselves,  that  Germany  thus  at  one  stroke  re-dis- 
covered her  poetic  language.  The  collapse  of  the  Hohenstaufen  rule  had  been 
accompanied  by  that  of  Germany's  Gothic  literature  also.  What  did  emerge 
here  and  there  in  the  following  centuries  — the  golden  age  of  all  the  Western 
literatures  — was  undeserving  of  the  name.  But  with  the  victories  of  Frederick 
the  Great  a new  poesy  began.  “From  Lessing  to  Hebbel”  means  the  same  as 
“from  Rossbach  to  Sedan.”  The  attempts  that  were  made  to  restore  the  lost 
connexion  by  consciously  leaning  upon,  first  the  French,  and  then  Shakespeare, 

^ And  every  English  schoolboy  knows  the  meaning  of  the  “Early  Piantagenets.”  — Tr- 

® Against  the  Swedes,  1675.  — 

® Against  the  French  and  their  German  dependent  allies,  1757.  — Tf. 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTUJ^E-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  183 

upon  the  Volkslied,  and  finally  (in  Romanticism)  upon  the  poetry  of  the  age 
of  chivalry,  produced  at  least  the  unique  phenomenon  of  an  art-history  which, 
though  it  never  really  attained  one  aim,  was  constituted,  for  the  greater  part, 
of  flashes  of  genius. 

The  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  witnessed  the  accomplishment  of  that 
remarkable  turn  with  which  national  consciousness  sought  to  emancipate  itself 
from  the  dynastic  principle.  To  all  appearance  this  had  happened  in  England 
long  before;  In  this  connexion  Magna  Charta  (1x15)  occur  to  most  readers, 
but  some  will  not  have  failed  to  observe  that  on  the  contrary,  the  very  recog- 
nition of  the  nation  involved  in  the  recognition  of  its  representatives  gave  the 
dynastic  feeling  a fresh-enforced  depth  and  refinement  to  which  the  peoples 
of  the  Continent  remained  almost  utter  strangers.  If  the  modern  Englishman 
is  (without  appearing  so)  the  most  conservative  human  being  in  the  world,  and 
if  in  consequence  his  political  management  solves  its  problems  so  much  by  word- 
less harmony  of  national  pulse  instead  of  express  discussion,  and  therefore  has 
been  the  most  successful  up  to  now,  the  underlying  cause  is  the  early  emancipation 
of  the  dynastic  feeling  from  its  expression  in  monarchical  power. 

The  French  Revolution,  on  the  contrary,  was  in  this  regard  only  a victory 
of  Rationalism.  It  set  free  not  so  much  the  nation  as  the  concept  of  the  nation. 
The  dynastic  has  penetrated  into  the  blood  of  the  Western  races,  and  on  that 
very  account  it  is  a vexation  to  their  intellect.  For  a dynasty  represents  history, 
it  is  the  history-become-flesh  of  a land,  and  intellect  is  timeless  and  unhistorical. 
The  ideas  of  the  Revolution  were  all  *‘eternar’  and  “true.”  Universal  human 
rights,  freedom,  and  equality  are  literature  and  abstraction  and  not  facts.  Call 
all  this  republican  if  you  will,  in  reality  it  was  one  more  case  of  a minority 
striving  in  the  name  of  all  to  introduce  the  new  ideal  into  the  world  of  fact. 
It  became  a power,  but  at  the  cost  of  the  ideal,  and  all  it  did  was  to  replace 
the  old  felt  adherence  by  the  reasoned  patriotism  of  the  nineteenth  century; 
by  a civilized  nationalism,  only  possible  in  our  Culture,  which  in  France  itself 
and  even  to-day  is  unconsciously  dynastic;  and  by  the  concept  of  the  fatherland 
as  dynastic  unit  which  emerged  first  in  the  Spanish  and  Prussian  uprisings  against 
Napoleon  and  then  in  the  German  and  Italian  wars  of  dynastic  unification.  Out 
of  the  opposition  of  race  and  speech,  blood  and  intellect,  a new  and  specifically 
Western  ideal  arose  to  confront  the  genealogical  ideal  — that  of  the  mother 
tongue.  Enthusiasts  there  were  in  both  countries  who  thought  to  replace  the 
unifying  force  of  the  Emperor-  and  King-idea  by  the  linking  of  republic  and 
poetry  — something  of  the  “return  to  nature”  in  this,  but  a return  of  history 
to  nature.  In  place  of  the  wars  of  succession  came  language-struggles,  in  which 
one  nation  sought  to  force  its  language  and  therewith  its  nationality  upon  the 
fragments  of  another.  But  no  one  will  fail  to  observe  that  even  the  rationalistic 
conception  of  a nation  as  a linguistic  unit  can  at  best  ignore,  never  abolish, 
the  dynastic  feeling,  any  more  than  a Hellenistic  Greek  could  inwardly  over- 


i84  : the  decline  of  the  west 

come  his  Polis-conscioustiess  or  a modern  Jew  the  national  ijma.  The  mother 
tongue  does  not  arise  out  of  nothing,  but  is  itself  a product  of  dynastic  history. 
Without  the  Capetian  line  there  would  have  been  no  French  language,  but  a 
Romance-Frankish  in  the  north  and  a Provengal  in  the  south.  The  Italian  writ- 
ten-language is  to  be  credited  to  the  German  Emperors  and  above  all  to  Frederick 
11.  The  modern  nations  are  primarily  the  populations  of  an  old  dynastic  his- 
tory. Yet In  the  nineteenth  century  the  second  concept  of  the  nation  as  a unit 
of  written  language  has  annihilated  the  Austrian,  and  probably  created  the 
American.  Thenceforward  there  have  been  in  ail  countries  two  parties  repre- 
senting the  nation  in  two  opposed  aspects,  as  dynastic-historical  unit  and  as 
intellectual  unit  — the  race  party  and  the  language  party  — but  these  are  re- 
flections that  evoke  too  soon  problems  of  politics  that  must  await  a later  chap- 
ter. 

V 

At  first,  when  the  land  was  still  without  cities,  it  was  the  nobility  that 
represented,  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word,  the  nation.  The  peasantry, 
“everlasting'*  and  historyiess,  was  a people  before  the  dawn  of  the  Culture,  and 
in  very  fundamental  characters  it  continued  to  be  the  primitive  people,  surviving 
when  the  form  of  the  nation  had  passed  away  again.  “The  nation,”  like  every 
other  grand  symbol  of  the  Culture,  is  intimately  the  cherished  possession  of  a 
few;  those  who  have  it  are  born  to  it  as  men  are  born  to  art  or  philosophy,  and 
the  distinctions  of  creator,  critic,  and  layman,  or  something  like  them,  hold  for 
it  also  — alike  in  a classical  Polls,  a Jewish  consensus,  and  a Western  people. 
When  a nation  rises  up  ardent  to  fight  for  its  freedom  and  honour,  it  is  always 
a minority  that  really  fires  the  multitude.  The  people  “ awakens  ” — it  is  more 
than  a figure  of  speech,  for  only  thus  and  then  does  the  waking-consciousness  of 
the  whole  become  manifested.  All  these  individuals  whose  “we "-feeling  yes- 
terday went  content  with  a horizon  of  family  and  job  and  perhaps  home-town 
are  suddenly  to-day  men  of  nothing  less  than  the  People.  Their  thought  and 
feeling,  their  Ego,  and  therewith  the  “it”  in  them  have  been  transformed  to  the 
very  depths.  It  has  become  historic.  And  then  even  the  unhistorical  peasant 
becomes  a member  of  the  nation,  and  a day  dawns  for  him  in  which  he  ex- 
periences history  and  not  merely  lets  it  pass  him  by. 

But  in  the  world-cities,  besides  a minority  which  has  history  and  livingly 
experiences,  feels,  and  seeks  to  lead  the  nation,  there  arises  another  minority 
of  timeless  a-historic,  literary  men,  men  not  of  destiny,  but  of  reasons  and 
causes,  men  who  are  inwardly  detached  from  the  pulse  of  blood  and  being,  wide- 
awake thinking  consciousnesses,  that  can  no  longer  find  any  “reasonable” 
connotation  for  the  nation-idea.  Cosmopolitanism  is  a mere  waking-conscious 
association  of  intelligentsias.  In  it  there  is  hatred  of  Destiny,  and  above  all  of 
history  as  the  expression  of  Destiny.  Everything  national  belongs  to  race  — 


PRIMITIVES,  CULTURE-PEOPLES,  FELLAHEEN  185 

so  mucli  so  that  it  is  incapable  of  finding  language  for  itself,  clumsy  in  all  that 
demands  thought,  and  shiftless  to  the  point  of  fatalism.  Cosmopolitanism  is 
literature  md  remains  literature,  very  strong  in  reasons,  very  weak  in  defending 
them  otherwise  than  with  more  reasons,  in  defending  them  with  the  blood. 

All  the  more,  then,  this  minority  of  far  superior  intellect  chooses  the  in- 
tellectual weapon,  and  all  the  more  is  it  able  to  do  so  as  the  world  cities  are  pure 
intellect,  rootless,  and  by  very  hypothesis  the  common  property  of  the  civili- 
zation. The  born  world-citizens,  world-pacifists,  and  world-reconcilers  — 
alike  in  the  China  of  the  “ Contending  States,’'  in  Buddhist  India,  in  the  Hellen- 
istic age,  and  in  the  Western  world  to-day  — are  the  spiritual  leaders  of  fellaheen, 
**  Fanem  et  dr  cense  s' ' is  only  another  formula  for  pacifism.  In  the  history  of  all 
Cultures  there  is  an  anti-national  element,  whether  we  have  evidences  of  it  or 
not.  Pure  self-directed  thinking  was  ever  alien  to  life,  and  therefore  alien  to 
history,  unwarlike,  raceless.  Consider  our  Humanism  and  Classicism,  the  Soph- 
ists of  Athens,  Buddha  and  Lao-tze  — not  to  mention  the  passionate  con- 
tempt of  all  nationalisms  displayed  by  the  great  champions  of  the  ecclesiastical 
and  the  philosophical  world-view.  However  the  cases  differ  amongst  them- 
selves otherwise,  they  are  alike  in  this,  that  the  world-feeling  of  race;  the  po- 
litical (and  therefore  national)  instinct  for  fact  country,  right  or 

wrong ! * ’);  the  resolve  to  be  the  subject  and  not  the  object  of  evolution  (for  one 
or  the  other  it  has  to  be)  — in  a word,  the  24>i//-to-power  ~ has  to  retreat  and 
make  room  for  a tendency  of  which  the  standard-bearers  are  most  often  men 
without  original  impulse,  but  all  the  more  set  upon  their  logic;  men  at  home  in 
a world  of  truths,  ideals,  and  Utopias;  bookmen  who  believe  that  they  can  re- 
place the  actual  by  the  logical,  the  might  of  facts  by  an  abstract  justice,  Destiny 
by  Reason.  It  begins  with  the  everlastingly  fearful  who  withdraw  themselves 
out  of  actuality  into  cells  and  study-chambers  and  spiritual  communities,  and 
proclaim  the  nullity  of  the  world’s  doings,  and  it  ends  in  every  Culture  with  the 
apostles  of  world-peace.  Every  people  has  such  (historically  speaking)  waste- 
products.  Even  their  heads  constitute  physiognomically  a group  by  themselves. 
In  the  “history  of  intellect"’  they  stand  high  — and  many  illustrious  names  are 
numbered  amongst  them  — but  regarded  from  the  point  of  view  of  actual  history, 
they  are  inefficients. 

The  Destiny  of  a nation  plunged  in  the  events  of  its  world  depends  upon  how 
far  its  race-quality  is  successful  in  making  these  events  historically  ineffective 
against  it.  It  could  perhaps  be  demonstrated  even  now  that  in  the  Chinese 
world  of  states  the  realm  of  Tsin  won  through  (150  b.c.)  because  it  alone  had 
kept  itself  free  from  Taoist  sentiments.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  Roman  people 
prevailed  over  the  rest  of  the  Classical  world  because  it  was  able  to  insulate  its 
conduct  of  policy  from  the  fellah-instincts  of  Hellenism. 

A nation  is  humanity  brought  into  living  form.  The  practical  result  of 
world-improving  theories  is  consistcntlj  sl  formless  and  therefore  historyless  mass. 


,86  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

All  world-improvers  and  world-citizens  stand  for  fellaheen  ideals,  whether  they 
know  it  or  not.  Their  access  mans  the  historical  ahdtcanon  of  the  nateontn  favour 
not  of  everlasting  pace,  hut  of  another  nation.  World-peace  is  always  a one-sided 
resolve.  The  pL  T^omana  had  for  the  later  soldier-emperors  and  Germanic 
W-kings  only  the  one  practical  significance  that  it  made  a formless  popula- 
tSi  of  a hundred  millions  a mere  object  for  the  will-to-power  of  small  wamor- 
groups  This  peace  cost  the  peaceful  sacrifices  beside  which  the  losses  of  Cannm 

feem  vanishingly  small.  The  Babylonian,  Chinese,  Indian,  Egptian  worlds 

pass  from  one  conqueror’s  hands  to  another’s,  and  it  is  their  own  blood  that  pays 
for  the  contest.  That  is  their-peace.  When  in  1401  J/j 

Mesopotamia,  they  built  a victory  memorial  out  of  the  skulls  of  a^hundrcd 
thous!iid  inhabitants  of  Baghdad,  which  had  not  defended  itself.  ^ 

intellectual  point  of  view,  no  doubt,  the  extinction  of  the  nations  puts  a fella- 
heen-world  above  history,  civilized  at  last  and  for  ever.  But  in  the  realm  of 
facts  it  reverts  to  a state  of  nature,  in  which  it  alternates  between  long  sub- 
missiveness and  brief  angers  that  for  ail  the  bloodshed  - world-peace  never 
diminishes  that-  alter  nothing.  Of  old  they  shed  their  blood  for  themselves; 
now  they  must  shed  it  for  others,  often  enough  for  the  mere  entertainment  of 
-tilers  _ that  is  the  difference.  A resolute  leader  who  collects  ten  thousand 
adventurers  about  him  can  do  as  he  pleases.  Were  the  whole  world  a single 
Imperium,  it  would  thereby  become  merely  the  maximum  conceivable  field  for 

the  exploits  of  such  conquering  heroes.  ^ _ , , „ . . ^ 

"dbver  doodt  als  Sklav  (better  dead  than  slave)  is  an  old  Frisian  peasant- 
saying. The  reverse  has  been  the  choice  of  every  Late  CivUization,  and  every 
Late  Civilization  has  had  to  experience  how  much  that  choice  costs  it. 


CHAPTER  VII 

PROBLEMS  OF  THE  ARABIAN  CULTURE 

(A) 

HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES 


CHAPTER  VII 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  ARABIAN  CULTURE 

(A) 

HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES 

I 

In  a rock-stratum  are  embedded  crystals  of  a mineral.  Clefts  and  cracks  occur^ 
water  filters  in,  and  the  crystals  are  gradually  washed  out  so  that  in  due  course 
only  their  hollow  mould  remains.  Then  come  volcanic  outbursts  which  ex- 
plode the  mountain;  molten  masses  pour  in,  stiffen,  and  crystallize  out  in  their 
turn.  But  these  are  not  free  to  do  so  in  their  own  special  forms.  They  must  fill 
up  the  spaces  that  they  find  available.  Thus  there  arise  distorted  forms,  crystals 
whose  inner  structure  contradicts  their  external  shape,  stones  of  one  kind  pre- 
senting the  appearance  of  stones  of  another  kind.  The  mineralogists  call  this 
phttiorntnoti  Pseudomorphosis, 

By  the  term  “ historical  pseud omorphosis”  I propose  to  designate  those 
cases  in  which  an  older  alien  Culture  lies  so  massively  over  the  land  that  a 
young  Culture,  born  in  this  land,  cannot  get  its  breath  and  fails  not  only 
to  achieve  pure  and  specific  expression-forms,  but  even  to  develop  fully  its  own 
self-consciousness.  All  that  wells  up  from  the  depths  of  the  young  soul  is  cast  in 
the  old  moulds,  young  feelings  stiffen  in  senile  works,  and  instead  of  rearing 
itself  up  in  its  own  creative  power,  it  can  only  hate  the  distant  power  with  a 
hate  that  grows  to  be  monstrous. 

This  is  the  case  of  the  Arabian  Culture.  Its  pre-history  lies  entirely  within 
the  ambit  of  the  ancient  Babylonian  Civilization,^  which  for  two  thousand  years 
had  been  the  prey  of  successive  conquerors.  Its  “Merovingian  period”  is 
marked  by  the  dictatorship  of  a small  ^ Persian  clan,  primitive  as  the  Ostro- 
goths, whose  domination  of  two  hundred  years,  scarcely  challenged,  was 
founded  on  the  infinite  weariness  of  a fellah-world.  But  from  300  b.c.  onwards 
there  begins  and  spreads  a great  awakening  in  the  young  Aramaic-speaking® 
peoples  between  Sinai  and  the  Zagros  range.  As  at  the  epoch  of  the  Trojan 
War  and  at  that  of  the  Saxon  emperors,  a new  relation  of  man  to  God,  a wholly 
new  world-feeling,  penetrated  all  the  current  religions,  whether  these  bore  the 
name  of  Ahuramazda,  Baal,  or  Yahweh,  impelling  everywhere  to  a great  effort 
of  creation.  But  precisely  at  this  juncture  there  came  the  Macedonians  — 

^ Sec  pp.  166,  et  scq.,  and  174,  et  seq. 

® Less  than  one  per  cent  of  the  population. 

® It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  home  of  the  Babylonian  Culture,  the  ancient  Sincat,  plays  no  part  of 
any  importance  in  the  coining  events.  For  the  Arabian  Culture  only  the  region  north  of  Babylon, 
not  that  to  south,  comes  into  question.  ^ 

189 


190  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

so  appositely  that  some  inner  connexion  is  not  altogether  impossible,  for  the 
Persian  power  had  rested  on  spiritual  postulates,  and  it  was  precisely  these  that 
had  disappeared.  To  Babylon  these  Macedonians  appeared  as  yet  another 
swarm  of  adventurers  like  the  rest.  They  laid  down  a thin  sheet  of  Classical 
Civilteatiott  over  the  lands  as  far  as  Turkestan  and  India.  The  kingdoms  of  the 
Diadochi  might  indeed  have  become,  insensibly,  states  of  pre-Arabian  spirit  — 
the  Seleucid  Empire,  which  actually  coincided  geographically  with  the  region  of 
Aramaic  speech,  was  in  fact  such  a state  by  xoo  b.c.  But  from  the  battle  of 
Pydna  ^ onwards  it  was,  in  its  western  part,  more  and  more  embodied  in  the 
Classical  Imperium  and  so  subjected  to  the  powerful  workings  of  a spirit  which 
had  its  centre  of  gravity  in  a distant  region.  And  thus  was  prepared  the  Pseu- 
domorphosis. 

The  Magian  Culture,  geographically  and  historically,  is  the  midmost  of 
the  group  of  higher  Cultures  — the  only  one  which,  in  point  both  of  space 
and  of  time,  was  in  touch  with  practically  all  others.  The  structure  of  its 
history  as  a whole  in  our  world-picture  depends,  therefore,  entirely  on  our  recog- 
nising the  true  inner  form  which  the  outer  moulds  distorted.  Unhappily,  that  is 
just  what  we  do  not  yet  know,  thanks  to  theological  and  philological  prepos- 
sessions, and  even  more  to  the  modern  tendency  of  over-spccialiaation  which 
has  unreasonably  subdivided  Western  research  into  a number  of  separate  branches 
— each  distinguished  from  the  others  not  merely  by  its  materials  and  its  methods, 
but  by  its  very  way  of  thinking  • — and  so  prevented  the  big  problems  from  being 
even  seen.  In  this  instance  the  consequences  of  specialization  have  been  graver 
perhaps  than  in  any  other.  The  historians  proper  stayed  within  the  domain  of 
Classical  philology  and  made  the  Classical  language-frontier  their  eastern  hori- 
zon; hence  they  entirely  failed  to  perceive  the  deep  unity  of  development  on 
both  sides  of  their  frontier,  which  spiritually  had  no  existence.  The  result  is  a 
perspective  of  “Ancient,**  “Mediaeval,**  and  “Modern**  history,  ordered  and 
defined  by  the  use  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  languages.  For  the  experts  of  the  old 
languages,  with  their  “texts,”  Axum,  Saba,  and  even  the  realm  of  the  Sassanids 
were  unattackable,  and  the  consequence  is  that  in  “history**  these  scarcely 
exist  at  all.  The  literature-researcher  (he  also  a philologist)  confuses  the  spirit  of 
the  language  with  the  spirit  of  the  work.  Products  of  the  Aramaean  region,  if 
they  happen  to  be  written  in  Greek  or  even  merely  preserved  in  Greek,  he  em- 
bodies in  his  “ Late  Greek  literature’  * and  proceeds  to  classify  as  a special  period 
of  that  literature.  The  cognate  texts  in  other  languages  are  outside  his  depart- 
ment and  have  been  brought  into  other  groups  of  literature  in  the  same  artificial 
way.  And  yet  here  was  the  strongest  of  all  proofs  that  the  history  of  a literature 
never  coincides  with  the  history  of  a language.^  Here,  in  reality,  was  a self- 

' The  victory  of  L.  Paullus  over  Perseus,  i68  b.c.  — Tr. 

® This  has  an  important  bearing  also  in  the  histories  of  the  Wcstcfn  literatures.  The  German 
is  written  in  part  in  Latin,  and  English  m French. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  191 

contained  ensemble  of  Magian  national  literature,  single  in  spirit,  but  written 
in  several  languages  — the  Classical  amongst  others.  For  a nation  of  Magian 
type  has  no  mother  tongue.  There  are  Talmudic,  Manichasan,  Nestorian, 
Jewish,  or  even  Neopythagorean  national  literatures,  but  not  Hellenistic  or 
Hebrew. 

Theological  research,  in  its  turn,  broke  up  its  domain  into  subdivisions 
according  to  the  different  West-European  confessions,  and  so  the  “philological’' 
frontier  between  West  and  East  came  into  force,  and  still  is  in  force,  for  Christian 
theology  also.  The  Persian  world  fell  to  the  student  of  Iranian  philology,  and 
as  the  Avesta  texts  were  disseminated,  though  not  composed,  in  an  Aryan 
dialect,  their  immense  problem  ^ came  to  be  regarded  as  a minor  branch  of  the 
Indologist’s  work  and  so  disappeared  absolutely  from  the  field  of  vision  of 
Christian  theology.  And  lastly  the  history  of  Talmudic  Judaism,  since  He- 
brew philology  became  bound  up  in  one  specialism  with  Old  Testament  research, 
not  only  never  obtained  separate  treatment,  but  has  been  completely  forgotten 
by  all  the  major  histories  of  religions  with  which  I am  acquainted,  although 
these  find  room  for  every  Indian  sect  (since  folk-lore,  too,  ranks  as  a specialism) 
and  every  primitive  Negro  religion  to  boot.  Such  is  the  preparation  of  scholar- 
ship for  the  greatest  task  that  historical  research  has  to  face  to-day. 

II 

The  Roman  world  of  the  Imperial  period  had  a good  idea  of  its  own  state. 
The  later  writers  are  full  of  complaints  concerning  the  depopulation  and 
spiritual  emptiness  of  Africa,  Spain,  Gaul,  and,  above  all,  the  mother  countries 
Italy  and  Greece.  But  those  provinces  which  belong  to  the  Magian  world  arc 
consistently  excepted  in  these  mournful  surveys.  Syria  in  particular  is  densely 
peopled  and,  like  Parthian  Mesopotamia,  flourishes  in  blood  and  spirit. 

The  preponderance  of  the  young  East,  palpable  to  all,  had  sooner  or  later 
to  find  political  expression  also.  Viewing  the  scene  from  this  standpoint,  we 
see  behind  the  epic  and  pageant  of  Marius  and  Sulla,  Cassar  and  Pompey,  Antony 
and  Octavian,  this  East  striving  ever  more  intensely  to  free  itself  from  the 
historically  dying  West,  the  fellah-world  waking  up.  The  transfer  of  the 
capital  to  Byzantium  was  a great  symbol.  Diocletian  had  selected  Nicodemia; 
C^sar  had  had  thoughts  of  Alexandria  or  Troy.  A better  choice  than  any  would 
have  been  Antioch.  But  the  act  came  too  late  by  three  centuries,  and  these  had 
been  the  decisive  period  of  the  Magian  Springtime. 

The  Pseudomorphosis  began  with  Actium;  there  it  should  have  been  Antony 
who  won.  It  was  not  the  struggle  of  Rome  and  Greece  that  came  there  to  an 
issue  — that  struggle  had  been  fought  out  at  Gannas  and  Zama,  where  it  was 
the  tragic  fate  of  Hannibal  to  stand  as  champion  not  for  his  own  land,  but  for 
Hellenism.  At  Actium  it  was  the  unborn  Arabian  Culture  that  was  opposed  to 
^ See  Professor  Geidner’s  article  ‘ * Zend  Avesta,  Brit,,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 


i9l  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

iron-grey  Classical  Civilization;  the  issue  lay  between  Principate  and  Caliphate. 
Antony’s  victory  would  have  freed  the  Magian  soul;  his  defeat  drew  over  its 
lands  the  hard  sheet  of  Roman  Impermm.  A comparable  event  in  the  history 
of  the  West  is  the  battle  between  Tours  and  Poitiers,  a.d.  73x.  Had  the  Arabs 
won  it  and  made  **Frankistan”  into  a caliphate  of  the  North-east,  Arabic 
speech,  religion,  and  customs  would  have  become  familiar  to  the  ruling  classes, 
giant  cities  like  Granada  and  Kairawan  would  have  arisen  on  the  Loire  and 
the  Rhine,  the  Gothic  feeling  would  have  been  forced  to  find  expression  in  the 
long-stiffened  forms  of  Mosque  and  Arabesque,  and  instead  of  the  German 
mysticism  we  should  have  had  a sort  of  Sufism.  That  the  equivalent  of  these 
things  actually  happened  to  the  Arabian  world  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
Syro-Persian  peoples  produced  no  Charles  Martel  to  battle  along  with  Mithra- 
dates  or  Brutus  and  Cassius  or  Antony  (or  for  that  matter  without  them)  against 
Rome. 

A second  pseudomorphosis  is  presented  to  our  eyes  to-day  in  Russia.  The 
Russian  hero-tales  of  the  Bylini  culminated  in  the  epic  cycle  of  Prince  Vladimir 
of  Kiev  (c.  A.D.  looo),  with  his  Round  Table,  and  in  the  popular  hero  Ilya 
Muromyets.^  The  whole  immense  difference  between  the  Russian  and  the 
Faustian  soul  is  already  revealed  in  the  contrast  of  these  with  the  “contempo- 
rary” Arthur,  Ermanarich,  and  Nibelungen  sagas  of  the  Migration-period  in 
the  form  of  the  Hildebrandslied  and  the  Waltharilied.^  The  Russian  “Merovin- 
gian” period  begins  with  the  overthrow  of  the  Tatar  domination  by  Ivan  III 
(1480)  and  passes,  by  the  last  princes  of  the  House  of  Rurik  and  the  first  of  the 
Romanovs,  to  Peter  the  Great  (1689-17^5).  It  corresponds  exactly  to  the 
period  between  Clovis  (481  "51 1)  and  the  battle  of  Testry  (687),  which 
effectively  gave  the  Carolingians  their  supremacy.  I advise  all  readers  to  read 
the  Frankish  history  of  Gregory  of  Tours  (to  591)  in  parallel  with  the  corre- 
sponding parts  of  Karamzin’s  pattiachal  narrative,  especially  those  dealing  with 
Ivan  the  Terrible,  and  with  Boris  Godunov  and  Vassili  Shuiski.®  There  could 
hardly  be  a closer  parallel.  This  Muscovite  period  of  the  great  Boyar  families 
and  Patriarchs,  in  which  a constant  element  is  the  resistance  of  an  Old  Russia 
party  to  the  friends  of  Western  Culture,  is  followed,  from  the  founding  of 
Petersburg  in  1703,  by  the  pseudomorphosis  which  forced  the  primitive  Russian 
soul  into  the  alien  mould,  first  of  full  Baroque,  then  of  the  Enlightenment,  and 
then  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  fate-figure  in  Russian  history  is  Peter  the 
Great,  with  whom  we  may  compare  the  Charlemagne  who  deliberately  and 

^ See  Wollner,  Untersuchmgen  uher  die  Voihepik  des  Grossrussen  (1879).  convenient  edition 
of  the  Kiev  Stories  is  Mary  Gill,  Les  Legendes  slams  (Paris,  191X).  — Lr.] 

^ The  former  is  dated  about  800,  the  latter  about  930.  ^ Tf. 

^ These  two  figures  — the  one  an  authorized  Mayor  of  the  Palace  before  he  was  Tsar,  the  other 
a crude  usurper  — dominate  the  period  of  Russian  history  called  the  “Period  of  Troubles’'  — i.e., 
that  between  the  death  of  Ivan  the  Terrible  in  1584  and  the  election  of  Michael  Romanov  in 
1613.  — ’ TV. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  193 

with  all  his  might  strove  to  impose  the  very  thing  which  Charles  Martel  had 
just  prevented^  the  rule  of  the  Moorish-Byzantine  spirit.  The  possibility  was 
there  of  treating  the  Russian  world  in  the  manner  of  a Carolingian  or  that  of 
Seleucid  — that  is,  of  choosing  between  Old  Russian  and  “Western*’  ways, 
and  the  Romanovs  chose  the  latter.  The  Seleucids  liked  to  see  Hellenes  and 
not  Aramaeans  about  them.  The  primitive  tsarism  of  Moscow  is  the  only  form 
which  is  even  to-day  appropriate  to  the  Russian  world,  but  in  Petersburg  it  was 
distorted  to  the  dynastic  form  of  western  Europe.  The  pull  of  the  sacred  South 
— of  Byizantium  and  Jerusalem  — strong  in  every  Orthodox  soul,  was  twisted 
by  the  worldly  diplomacy  which  set  its  face  to  the  West.  The  burning  of 
Moscow,  that  mighty  symbolic  act  of  a primitive  people,  that  expression  of 
Maccabasan  hatred  of  the  foreigner  and  heretic,  was  followed  by  the  entry  of  Al- 
exander! into  Paris,  the  Holy  Alliance,  and  the  concert  of  the  Great  Powers 
of  the  West.  And  thus  a nationality  whose  destiny  should  have  been  to  live 
without  a history  for  some  generations  still  was  forced  into  a false  and  artificial 
history  that  the  soul  of  Old  Russia  was  simply  incapable  of  understanding. 
Late-period  arts  and  sciences,  enlightenment,  social  ethics,  the  materialism  of 
world-cities,  were  introduced,  although  in  this  pre-cultural  time  religion  was 
the  only  language  in  which  man  understood  himself  and  the  world.  In  the 
townless  land  with  its  primitive  peasantry,  cities  of  alien  type  fixed  themselves 
like  ulcers  — false,  unnatural,  unconvincing.  “Petersburg,”  says  Dostoyevski, 
“is  the  most  abstract  and  artificial  city  in  the  world.”  Born  in  it  though 
he  was,  he  had  the  feeling  that  one  day  it  might  vanish  with  the  morning  mist. 
Just  so  ghostly,  so  incredible,  were  the  Hellenistic  artifact-cities  scattered  in  the 
Aramaic  peasant-lands.  Jesus  in  his  Galilee  knew  this.  St.  Peter  must  have  felt 
it  when  he  set  eyes  on  Imperial  Rome. 

After  this  everything  that  arose  around  it  was  felt  by  the  true  Russdom  as 
lies  and  poison.  A truly  apocalyptic  hatred  was  directed  on  Europe,  and 
“Europe’*  was  all  that  was  not  Russia,  including  Athens  and  Rome,  just  as 
for  the  Magian  world  in  its  time  Old  Egypt  and  Babylon  had  been  antique, 
pagan,  devilish.  “ The  first  condition  of  emancipation  for  the  Russian  soul,” 
wrote  Aksakov  in  1863  to  Dostoyevski,  “is  that  it  should  hate  Petersburg 
with  all  its  might  and  all  its  soul.”  Moscow  is  holy,  Petersburg  Satanic.  A 
widespread  popular  legend  presents  Peter  the  Great  as  Antichrist.  Just  so  the 
Aramaic  Pseudomorphosis  cries  out  in  all  the  Apocalypses  from  Daniel  and 
Enoch  in  Maccabasan  times  to  John,  Baruch,  and  Ezra  IV  after  the^estruction 
of  Jerusalem,  against  Antiochus  the  Antichrist,  against  Rome  the  Whore  of 
Babylon,  against  the  cities  of  the  West  with  their  refinement  and  their  splen- 
dour, against  the  whole  Classical  Culture.  All  its  works  are  untrue  and  un- 
clean; the  polite  society,  the  clever  artistry,  the  classes,  the  alien  state  with  its 
civilized  diplomacy,  justice,  and  administration.  The  contrast  between  Rus- 
sian and  Western,  Jew-Christian  and  Late-Classical  nihilisms  is  extreme  — 


194'  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

the  one  kind  is  hatred  of  the  alien  that  is  poisoning  the  unborn  Culture  in  the 
womb  of  the  land,  the  other  a surfeited  disgust  of  one’s  own  proper  over- 
growths. Depths  of  religious  feeling,  flashes  of  revelation,  shuddering  fear  of 
the  great  awakening,  metaphysical  dreaming  and  yearning,  belong  to  the 
beginning,  as  the  pain  of  spiritual  clarity  belongs  to  the  end  of  a history.  In 
these  pseudomorphoses  they  are  mingled.  Says  Dostoyevski:  “Everyone  in 
street  and  market-place  now  speculates  about  the  nature  of  Faith.”  So  might 
it  have  been  said  of  Edessa  or  Jerusalem.  Those  young  Russians  of  the  days 
before  1914  — dirty,  pale,  exalted,  moping  in  corners,  ever  absorbed  in  meta- 
physics, seeing  all  things  with  an  eye  of  faith  even  when  the  ostensible  topic  is 
the  franchise,  chemistry,  or  women’s  education  — are  the  Jews  and  early 
Christians  of  the  Hellenistic  cities,  whom  the  Romans  regarded  with  a mixture 
of  surly  amusement  and  secret  fear.  In  Tsarist  Russia  there  was  no  bourgeoisie 
and,  in  general,  no  true  class-system,  but  merely,  as  in  the  Frankish  dominions, 
lord  and  peasant.  There  were  no  Russian  towns.  Moscow  consisted  of  a 
fortified  residency  (the  Kreml)  round  which  was  spread  a gigantic  market. 
The  imitation  city  that  grew  up  and  ringed  it  in,  like  every  other  city  on  the 
soil  of  Mother  Russia,  is  there  for  the  satisfaction  and  utilities  of  the  Court, 
the  administration,  the  traders,  but  that  which  lives  in  it  is,  on  the  top,  an 
embodiment  of  fiction,  an  Intelligentsia  bent  on  discovering  problems  and  con- 
flicts, and  below,  an  uprooted  peasantry,  with  all  the  metaphysical  gloom,  anx- 
iety, and  misery  of  their  own  Dostoyevski,  perpetually  homesick  for  the  open 
land  and  bitterly  hating  the  stony  grey  world  into  which  Antichrist  has  tempted 
them.  Moscow  had  no  proper  soul . The  spirit  of  the  upper  classes  was  Western, 
and  the  lower  had  brought  in  with  them  the  soul  of  the  countryside.  Between 
the  two  worlds  there  was  no  reciprocal  comprehension,  no  communication, 
no  charity.  To  understand  the  two  spokesmen  and  victims  of  the  pseudomor- 
phosis,  it  is  enough  that  Dostoyevski  is  the  peasant,  and  Tolstoi  the  man  of 
Western  society.  The  one  could  never  in  his  soul  get  away  from  the  land;  the 
other,  in  spite  of  his  desperate  efforts,  could  never  get  near  it. 

Tolstoi  is  the  former  Russia,  Dostoyevski  the  coming  Russia.  The  inner  Tolstoi 
is  tied  to  the  West.  He  is  the  great  spokesman  of  Petrinism  even  when  he  is 
denying  it.  The  West  is  never  without  a negative  — the  guillotine,  too,  was 
a true  daughter  of  Versailles  — and  rage  as  he  might  against  Europe,  Tolstoi 
could  never  shake  it  off.  Hating  it,  he  hates  himself  and  so  becomes  the  father 
of  Bolshevism.  The  utter  powerlessness  of  this  spirit,  and  “its”  1917  revolu- 
tion, stands  confessed  in  his  posthumously  published  A[  Shines  in  the  Dark- 

ness.  This  hatred  Dostoyevski  does  not  know.  His  passionate  power  of 
living  is  comprehensive  enough  to  embrace  all  things  Western  as  well  — “I 
have  two  fatherlands,  Russia  and  Europe.”  He  has  passed  beyond  both  Petrin- 
ism and  revolution,  and  from  future  he  looks  back  over  them  as  from  afar. 
His  soul  is  apocalyptic,  yearning,  desperate,  but  of  this  future  certain.  “I  will 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  195 

go  to  Europe,”  says  Ivan  Karamazov  to  his  mother,  Alyosha;  *‘I  know  well 
enough  that  I shall  be  going  only  to  a churchyard,  but  I know  too  that  that 
churchyard  is  dear,  very  dear  to  me.  Beloved  dead  lie  buried  there,  every 
stone  over  them  tells  of  a life  so  ardently  lived,  so  passionate  a belief  in  its  own 
achievements,  its  own  truth,  its  own  battle,  its  own  knowledge,  that  I know 
— even  now  I know  — I shall  fall  down  and  kiss  these  stones  and  weep  over 
them.”  Tolstoi,  on  the  contrary,  is  essentially  a great  understanding,  “en- 
lightened” and  “socially  minded.”  All  that  he  sees  about  him  takes  the 
Late-period,  megalopolitan,  and  Western  form  of  a problem^  whereas  Dostoyevski 
does  not  even  know  what  a problem  is.  Tolstoi  is  an  event  within  and  of 
Western  Civilization.  He  stands  midway  between  Peter  and  Bolshevism,  and 
neither  he  nor  these  managed  to  get  within  sight  of  Russian  earth.  The  thing 
they  are  fighting  against  reappears,  recognizable,  in  the  very  form  in  which 
they  fight.  Their  kind  of  opposition  is  not  apocalyptic  but  intellectual. 
Tolstoi’s  hatred  of  property  is  an  economist’s,  his  hatred  of  society  a social 
reformer’s,  his  hatred  of  the  State  a political  theorist’s.  Hence  his  immense 
effect  upon  the  West  — ■ he  belongs,  in  one  respect  as  in  another,  to  the  band  of 
Marx,  Ibsen,  and  Zola. 

Dostoyevski,  on  the  contrary,  belongs  to  no  band,  unless  it  be  the  band  of 
the  Apostles  of  primitive  Christianity.  His  “Daemons”  were  denounced  by  the 
Russian  Intelligentsia  as  reactionaries.  But  he  himself  was  quite  unconscious 
of  such  conflicts  — “conservative”  and  “revolutionary”  were  terms  of  the 
West  that  left  him  indifferent.  Such  a soul  as  his  can  look  beyond  everything 
that  we  call  social,  for  the  things  of  this  world  seem  to  it  so  unimportant  as 
not  to  be  worth  improving.  No  genuine  religion  aims  at  improving  the  world 
of  facts,  and  Dostoyevski,  like  every  primitive  Russian,  is  fundamentally  un- 
aware of  that  world  and  lives  in  a second,  metaphysical  world  beyond.  What 
has  the  agony  of  a soul  to  do  with  Communism?  A religion  that  has  got  as 
far  as  taking  social  problems  in  hand  has  ceased  to  be  a religion.  But  the  reality 
in  which  Dostoyevski  lives,  even  during  this  life,  is  a religious  creation  di- 
rectly present  to  him.  His  Alyosha  has  defied  all  literary  criticism,  even 
Russian.  His  life  of  Christ,  had  he  written  it  *—■  as  he  always  intended  to 
do  — would  have  been  a genuine  gospel  like  the  Gospels  of  primitive  Chris- 
tianity, which  stand  completely  outside  Classical  and  Jewish  literary  forms. 
Tolstoi,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a master  of  the  Western  novel  — Anna  Karenina 
distances  every  rival  — and  even  in  his  peasant’s  garb  remains  a man  of  polite 
society. 

Here  we  have  beginning  and  end  clashing  together.  Dostoyevski  is  a 
saint,  Tolstoi  only  a revolutionary.  From  Tolstoi,  the  true  successor  of  Peter, 
and  from  him  only,  proceeds  Bolshevism,  which  is  not  the  contrary,  but  the 
final  issue  of  Petrinism,  the  last  dishonouring  of  the  metaphysical  by  the 
social,  and  ipso  facto  a new  form  of  the  Pscudomorphosis.  If  the  building  of 


196  the  decline  of  the  west 


Petersburg  was  the  first  act  of  Antichrist,  the  self-destruction  of  the  society 
formed  of  that  Petersburg  is  the  second,  and  so  the  peasant  soul  must  feel  it. 
For  the  Bolshevists  are  not  the  nation,  or  even  a part  of  it,  but  the  lowest 
stratum  of  this  Petrine  society,  alien  and  western  like  the  other  strata,  yet  not 
recognized  by  these  and  consequently  filled  with  the  hate  of  the  downtrodden. 
Iris  all  megalopolitan  and  "Civilized”  — the  social  politics,  the  Intelligentsia, 
the  literature  that  first  in  the  romantic  and  then  in  the  economic  jargon  cham- 
pions freedoms  and  reforms,  before  an  audience  that  itself  belongs  to  the  soci- 
ety. The  real  Russian  is  a disciple  of  Dostoyevski.  Although  he  may  not 
have  read  Dostoyevski  or  anyone  else,  nay,  perhaps  because  he  cannot  read,  he  is 
himself  Dostoyevski  in  substance;  and  if  the  Bolshevists,  who  see  in  Christ  a 
mere  social  revolutionist  like  themselves,  were  not  intellectually  so  narrowed, 
it  would  be  in  Dostoyevski  that  they  would  recognize  their  prime  enemy. 
What  gave  this  revolution  its  momentum  was  not  the  intelligentsia  s hatred. 
It  was  the  people  itself,  which,  without  hatred^  urged  only  by  the  need  of  throw- 
ing ofi"  a disease,  destroyed  the  old  Westernism  in  one  effort  of  upheaval,  and 
will  send  the  new  after  it  in  another.  For  what  this  townless  people  yearns 
for  is  its  own  life-form,  its  own  religion,  its  own  history.  Tolstoi’s  Christianity 
was  a misunderstanding.  He  spoke  of  Christ  and  he  meant  Marx.  But  to 
Dostoyevski* s Christianity  the  next  thousand  years  will  belong. 

in 

Outside  the  Pseudomorphosis,  and  the  more  vigorously  in  proportion  as 
the  Classical  influence  is  weaker  over  the  country,  there  spring  up  all  the  forms 
of  a genuine  feudal  age.  Scholasticism,  mysticism,  feudal  fealty,  minstrelsy, 
the  crusade  spirit,  all  existed  in  the  first  centuries  of  the  Arabian  Culture  and 
will  be  found  in  it  as  soon  as  we  know  how  to  look  for  them.  The  legion 
existed  in  name  even  after  Septimius  Severus,  but  in  the  East,  legions  look  for 
all  the  world  like  ducal  retinues.  OSicials  are  nominated,  but  what  nomination 
amounts  to  in  reality  is  the  investiture  of  a count  with  his  fief.  While  in  the 
West  the  C^sar-title  fell  into  the  hands  of  chieftains,  the  East  transformed 
itself  into  an  early  Caliphate  amazingly  like  the  feudal  state  of  mature  Gothic. 
In  the  Sassanid  Empire,^  in  Hauran,^  in  southern  Arabia,  there  dawned  a pure 
feudal  period.  The  exploits  of  a king  of  Saba,^  Shamir  Juharish,  are  immortalized 
like  those  of  a Roland  or  an  Arthur,  in  the  Arabic  saga  which  tells  of  his  ad- 
vance through  Persia  as  far  as  China. The  Kingdom  of  Ma’in^  existed  side  by 

^ Covering,  before  its  later  extensions,  Persia  and  Iraq  to  the  Euphrates.  — Tr. 

* The  region  south  of  Damascus  and  cast  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  — TV. 

® Saba  (Sheba)  is,  roughly,  the  modern  yemen,  though  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  Sabscan 
Kingdom  may  earlier  have  been  in  northern  Arabia.  Sec  Dr.  D,  H.  Muller’s  article  “Sabacans 
in  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.  — Tr. 

^ Schiele,  Die  Religion  in  Geschichte  und  Gegenwart,  I,  647. 

® The  “Minaean”  and  the  Sabsean  kingdoms  were  the  two  outstanding  hegemonies  of  early 


HISTORIG  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  197 

side  with  the  realm  of  Israel  during  the  millennium  before  Christ,  and  its  re- 
mains (which  suggest  comparisons  with  Mycenas  and  Tiryns)  extend  deeply 
into  Africa,^  But  now  the  feudal  age  flowered  throughout  Arabia  and  even  in 
the  mountains  of  Abyssinia.^  In  Axum  there  arose  during  early  Christian  times 
mighty  castles  and  kings’  tombs  with  the  largest  monoliths  in  the  world.® 
Behind  the  kings  stands  a feudal  nobility  of  counts  (kail)  and  wardens  (kahir), 
vassals  of  often  questionable  loyalty  whose  great  possessions  more  and  more 
narrowed  the  power  of  the  king  and  his  household.  The  endless  Christian- 
Jewish  wars  between  south  Arabia  and  the  kingdom  of  Axum  ^ have  essentially 
the  character  of  chivalry-warfare,  frequently  degenerating  into  baronial  feuds 
based  on  the  castles.  In  Saba  ruled  the  Hamdanids  — who  later  became 
Christian.  Behind  them  stood  the  Christian  realm  of  Axum,  in  alliance  with 
Rome,  which  about  a.d.  300  stretched  from  the  White  Nile  to  the  Somali 
coast  and  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  in  5x5  overthrew  the  Jewish-Himaryites.® 
In  54X  there  was  a diet  of  princes  at  Marib  ® to  which  both  the  Roman  and  the 
Sassanid  Empires  sent  ambassadors.  Even  to-day  the  country  is  full  of  in- 
numerable relics  of  mighty  castles,  which  in  Islamic  times  were  popularly 
attributed  to  supernatural  builders.  The  stronghold  of  Gomdan  is  a work  of 
twenty  tiers.’' 

In  the  Sassanid  Empire  ruled  the  Dikhans,  or  local  lords,  while  the  brilliant 
court  of  these  early-Eastern  “ Hohenstaufen”  was  in  every  respect  a model  for 
that  of  the  Byzantines  who  followed  Diocletian.  Even  much  later  the  Abbas- 
sids  in  their  new  capital  of  Baghdad  could  think  of  nothing  better  than  to 
imitate,  on  a grand  scale,  the  Sassanid  ideal  of  court  life.  In  northern  Arabia, 

Arabian  history,  Ma'in,  in  southern  Arabia,  should  not  be  confused  with  the  Ma’an  which  lies 
north-east  of  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  — Tf. 

^ Bent,  The  Sacred  City  of  the  Ethiopians  (London  1893),  pp.  134,  et  scq.,  deals  with  the  remains 
of  Jeha,  the  inscriptions  of  which  are  dated  by  Glaser  between  the  seventh  and  fifth  centuries  before 
Qirist.  See  D.  li.  Mallcv/Btirgen  and  Schldsser  Sudarahiens. 

2 Gfimmc,  Mohammed^ ct  scq. 

® German  Axum  Expedition  record  (1913),  Vol.  H. 

* An  ancient  trade-route  from  Persia  crossed  the  straits  of  Ormus  and  of  Bab-el-Mandeb,  trav- 
ersing South  Arabia  and  terminating  in  Abyssinia  and  the  Nile  region.  It  is  historically  more 
important  than  the  northern  route  over  the  Isthmus  of  Suez. 

® So  little  is  known  as  to  these  events  by  British  (or  any  other)  students  that  a brief  record  may 
be  useful.  The  original  Himaryites  or  Homerites,  a people  of  the  south-west  angle  of  Arabia,  had 
displaced  the  Sabseans  in  control  of  South  Arabia  in  the  second  century  b.c.  The  Himaryite  hegem- 
ony was  overthrown  by  invaders  from  Axum  over  the  water  about  a.d.  300,  and  the  Axumitc 
rulers  were,  inter  alia^  icings  of  Hadramaut  — hence  the  mention  in  the  text  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 
But  a Himaryite  opposition  continued,  and,  adopting  Judaism  as  a counter-religion,  it  succeeded 
for  a time  in  throwing  off  the  Abyssinian  rule.  Axum,  however  (aided,  as  a Christian  state,  by 
Rome),  reasserted  her  dominion  in  5x5  and  held  it  for  fifty  years,  till  an  attack  of  Sassanid  Persians 
displaced  them  again.  Thereafter  southern  Arabia  fell  into  the  swaying  chaos  in  which  the  com- 
ing of  Mohammed  found  it.  — Tr. 

® The  capital  of  Saba.  — Tr. 

Grimme,  p.  43.  Illustrations  of  these  immense  ruins  of  Gomdan,  ibid.,  p.  81,  and  reconstruc- 
tions in  the  German  Axum  report. 


198  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

at  the  courts  of  the  Ghassanids  ^ and  at  those  of  the  Lakhmids,  ^ there  sprang  up 
a genuine  troubadour  and  Minne  poetry;  and  knightly  poets,  in  the  days  of  the 
Early  Fathers,  fought  out  their  duels  with  ‘‘  word,  lance,  and  sword.’"  One  of 
them  was  the  Jew  Samuel,  lord  of  the  castle  of  A1  Alblaq,  who  stood  a famous 
siege  by  the  King  of  Hira  for  the  sake  of  five  precious  suits  of  armour. ^ In 
relation  to  this  lyric  poetry,  the  Late-Arabic  which  flourished,  especially  in 
Spain,  from  800  stands  as  Uhland  and  Eichendorff  stand  to  Walter  von  der 
Vogelweide. 

For  this  young  world  of  the  first  centuries  of  our  era  our  antiquarians  and 
theologians  have  had  no  eyes.  Busied  as  they  are  with  the  state  of  Late  Re- 
publican and  Imperial  Rome,  the  conditions  of  the  Middle  East  seem  to  them 
merely  primitive  and  void  of  all  significance.  But  the  Parthian  bands  that 
again  and  again  rode  at  the  legions  of  Rome  were  a chivalry  exalted  by  Maa;- 
daism;  in  their  armies  there  was  the  spirit  of  crusade.  So,  too,  might  it 
have  been  with  Christianity  if  it  had  not  been  wholly  bound  under  the  power 
of  the  pseudomorphosis.  The  spirit  was  there  — Tertuilian  spoke  of  the 
'^militia  Christie'*  and  the  sacrament  was  the  soldier’s  oath  of  fidelity.^  But  it 
was  only  later  that  Christ  became  the  hero  for  whom  his  vassals  went  out 
against  the  heathen;  for  the  time  being,  the  hither  side  of  the  Roman  frontier 
knew  not  Christian  lords  and  knights,  but  only  Roman  legates;  not  the  castle, 
but  the  castra;  not  tournaments,  but  executions.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  this  it  was 
not,  strictly  speaking,  a Parthian  war,  but  a true  crusade  of  Jewry  that  blazed 
out  in  1 15  when  Trajan  marched  into  the  East,  and  it  was  as  a reprisal  for  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  that  the  whole  infidel  (“Greek”)  population  of 
Cyprus  — traditionally  2.40,000  souls  ' — was  massacred.^  Nisibis,  defended  by 
Jews,  made  an  illustrious  resistance.  Warlike  Adiabene  (the  upper  Tigris 
plain)  was  a Jewish  state.  In  all  the  Parthian  and  Persian  wars  against  Rome 
the  gentry  and  peasantry,  the  feudal  levy,  of  Jewish  Mesopotamia  fought  in  the 
front  line. 

Byzantium,  even,  was  not  able  entirely  to  evade  the  influence  of  the  Arabian 
feudal  age,  and,  under  a crust  of  Late  Classical  administrative  forms,  the  fief 
system  (especially  in  the  interior  of  Asia  Minor)  came  into  existence.  There 
there  were  powerful  families  whose  loyalty  was  doubtful  and  whose  ambition 
was  to  possess  the  Imperial  throne.  “ Originally  tied  to  the  capital,  which  they 

^ The  country  of  Ghassan  extends  east  of  the  Jordan,  parallel  to  and  inland  of  Palestine  and  Syria, 
approximately  from  Petra  to  the  middle  Euphrates.  — Tr . 

^ The  Lakhmids  were  the  ruling  dynasty,  from  the  third  to  the  sixth  century  after  Christ,  of 
the  realm  of  Hira,  which  tan  in  a strip  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  present  Nejd  coast  on  the  one 
hand  and  the  desert  of  Arabia  on  the  other.  ‘ Tr. 

^'Brock.t\m2mi,GeschfchtedefarahischmLiPeratur,)^.^i^, 

^ The  whole  structure  of  Mithraism  (so  far  as  wc  know  it)  presents  strong  analogies  with  that 
of  a military  order. — Tr. 

^ As  well  as  it  is  said  1x0,000  at  Gyrene.  At  Alexandria,  too,  there  were  emmtes  and  counter* 
hneutes.' — Tr. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  199 

were  not  allowed  to  leave  without  the  Emperor’s  permission,  this  nobility 
settled  down  later  on  its  broad  estates  in  the  provinces.  From  the  fourth  cen- 
tury onwards  this  provincial  nobility  was  de  facto  an  ‘Estate  of  the  realm,’ 
and  in  course  of  time  it  claimed  a certain  independence  of  Imperial  control.”  ^ 

The  “Roman  Army”  in  the  East,  meanwhile,  was  transformed  in  less  than 
two  centuries  from  an  army  of  modern  type  to  one  of  the  feudal  order.  The 
Roman  legion  disappeared  in  the  reorganization  of  the  age  of  Severus,^  about 
A.D.  loo.  While  in  the  West  the  army  degenerated  into  hordes,  in  the  East  there 
arose,  in  the  fourth  century  a genuine,  if  belated,  knighthood  — a fact  that 
Mommsen  long  ago  pointed  out,  without,  however,  seeing  the  significance  of 
it.®  The  young  noble  received  a thorough  education  in  single  combat,  horse- 
manship, use  of  bow  and  lance.  About  a.d.  a6o  the  Emperor  GalHenus  — 
the  friend  of  Plotinus  and  the  builder  of  the  Porta  Nigra  of  Trier,  one  of  the 
most  striking  and  most  unfortunate  figures  of  the  period  of  the  soldier-emper- 
ors — formed,  from  Germans  and  Moors,  a new  type  of  mounted  force,  the 
personal  military  suite. ^ A significant  light  is  thrown  upon  the  changes  by  the 
fact  that  the  old  city-gods  give  way,  in  the  religion  of  the  army,  to  the  German 
gods  of  personal  heroism,  under  the  labels  of  Mars  and  Hercules.®  Diocletian’s 
•palatini  are  not  a substitute  for  the  praetorians  abolished  by  Septimius  Severus, 
but  a small,  well-disciplined  knight-army,  while  the  comitatmsesy  the  general 
levy,  are  organized  in  ^'numen'  or  companies.  The  tactics  are  those  of  every 
Early  period,  with  its  pride  of  personal  courage.  The  attack  takes  the  Germanic 
form  of  the  so-called  “boar’s  head”  — the  deep  mass  technically  called  the 
Gevierthaufe.^  Under  Justinian  we  find,  fully  developed,  a system  corresponding 
precisely  to  the  Landsknecht  system  of  Charles  V,  in  which  condottieri  ^ of  the 
Frundsberg  type  ® raise  professional  forces  on  a territorial  basis.  The  expedition 

^ and  Kukurgeschtchu  des  ByXj^ntinischen  Ketches,  15. 

2 Delbriick  Geschkhte  der  Kfkgskunst,  ll,  p.  [For  British  students  C.  W.  C.  Oman's  Art  of 
War:  Middle  Ages  will  be  more  readily  available,  although  Oman  treats  the  sub  ject  more  as  a matter 
of  formal  military  organization  than  does  Delbriick.  Neither  writer  deals  with  any  social  features 
of  the  change  as  it  worked  itself  out  in  the  East,  both  being  concerned  almost  entirely  with  its 
Western  aspects  and  phases.  The  origin  of  the  late-Byzantine  army  system,  as  military  historians 
arc  aware,  is  an  obscure  and  difficult  subject.  By  what  stages,  after  the  decadence  of  the  legion, 
was  the  **  Landsknecht"  army  of  Justinian  reached?  Like  other  elements  of  middle-East  history  in 
the  epoch  of  the  Arabian  Culture,  it  still  awaits  the  full  investigation  that  the  West  has  already 
had.."— -Tf. '■  ■ ■ 

2 Gesammelte  Schriften^Vd , 53Z. 

^ Gefolgstremn  in  German,  The  choice  of  an  equivalent  mediaeval  term  in  English  is  difficult, 
since  any  one  that  may  be  selected  carries  with  it  certain  implications  for  students  of  feudal  ori- 
gins. — Tf. 

® Domaszewski,  Die  Religion  der  romischen  Heeres,  p.  49. 

® The  typical  form,  for  instance,  of  the  Swiss  in  their  independence-battles,  and  of  Western 
infantry  generally  in  the  ffiteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  during  the  transition  from  hand-arm  to 
fire-arm  warfare.  — Tr. 

^ Buccellmn;  see  Delbruck,  op,  cit.,  II,  354. 

2 Georg  von  Frundsberg  (1473-15x8).  Short  article  in  Bfi/,,  XI  ed.  Tf. 


2.00 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

of  Narses  is  described  by  Procopius  ^ just  as  one  might  describe  the  great  re~ 
cruiting-operations  of  Wallenstein. 

But  there  appeared  also  in  these  early  centuries  a brilliant  Scholasticism 
and  Mysticism  of  Magian  type,  domesticated  in  the  renowned  schools  of  the 
Aram^an  region  — the  Persian  schools  of  Ctesiphon,  Resaina,  Gundisapora, 
the  Jewish  of  Sura,  Nehardea,  Kinnesrin,^  These  are  flourishing  headquarters 
of  astronomy,  philosophy,  chemistry,  medicine.  But  towards  the  west  these 
grand  manifestations,  too,  become  falsified  by  the  Pseudomdrphosis*  The 
characteristically  Magian  elements  of  this  knowledge  assume  at  Alexandria  the 
forms  of  Greek  philosophy  and  at  Beyrout  those  of  Roman  jurisprudence;  they 
are  committed  to  writing  in  the  Classical  languages,  squee2:ed  into  alien  and 
long-petrified  literary  forms,  and  perverted  by  the  hoary  logic  of  a Civilization  of 
quite  other  structure.  It  is  in  this,  and  not  in  the  Islamic,  time  that  Arabian 
science  began.  Yet,  as  our  philologists  only  unearthed  what  had  been  put  in 
Late  Classical  dress  at  Alexandria  and  Antioch,  and  had  not  an  inkling  cither  of 
the  immense  wealth  of  the  Arabian  spring  or  of  the  real  pivots  of  its  researches 
and  ideas,  there  arose  the  preposterous  notion  that  the  Arabs  were  spiritual 
epigoni  of  the  Classical.  In  reality,  practically  everything  that  was  produced  on 
the  **  other’  * side  — from  Edessa’s  point  of  view  — of  the  philologist’s  frontier, 
though  seeming  to  the  Western  eye  an  offspring  of  a ‘‘Late  Classical”  spirit,  is 
nothing  but  a reflection  of  Early  Arabian  inwardness.  And  so  we  come  to  con- 
sider what  the  Pseudomorphosis  did  for  the  Arabian  religion. 

IV 

The  Classical  religion  lived  in  its  vast  number  of  separate  cults ^ which  in  this 
form  were  natural  and  self-evident  to  Apollinian  man,  essentially  inaccessible 
to  any  alien.  As  soon  as  cults  of  this  kind  arise,  we  have  a Classical  Culture, 
and  when  their  essence  changes,  in  later  Roman  times,  then  the  soul  of  this 
Culture  is  at  an  end.  Outside  the  Classical  landscape  they  have  never  been 
genuine  and  living.  The  divinity  is  always  hound  to  and  bounded  by  one  locality^ 
in  conformity  with  the  static  and  Euclidean  world-feeling.  Correspondingly 
the  relation  of  man  to  the  divinity  takes  the  shape  of  a local  cult,  in  which 
the  significances  lie  in  the  form  of  its  ritual  procedure  and  not  in  a dogma  under- 
lying them.  Just  as  the  population  was  scattered  geographically  in  innumerable 
points,  so  spiritually  its  religion  was  subdivided  into  these  petty  cults,  each  of 
which  was  entirely  independent  of  the  rest.  Only  their  number,  and  not  their 

^ Gothic  War,  IV,  z6.  [The  same  holds  good  for  Belisarius's  armies.  — Tr.] 

* Nisibis  and  Edcssa  in  the  up-country  between  Euphrates  and  Tigris  arc  represented  to-day 
by  Nasibin  (Nezib)  and  Urfa  respectively;  ji^t  to  the  west  of  them,  cast  of  the  Euphrates  above 
Sura,  were  the  three  Jewish  academics,  in  which  Talmudic  Judaism  took  shape  after  the  Dispersion. 
Kinnesrin  lay  just  south  of  Aleppo.  Ctesiphon  ts,  of  course,  the  classical  city  on  the  Tigris,  still 
dominant  under  the  Sassanids,  and  Resaina  lies  in  the  up-country  south-west  of  Nisibis.  Gundi- 
sapora is  Gundcr-Shapur  (Jundaisapur),  near  the  site  of  the  old  Elamite  capital  Susa  in  Arabistan. 
— Xf. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  loi 

sc(^p^  cafahle  of  increase.  Within  the  Classical  religion  multiplication  was 
the  only  form  of  growth,  and  missionary  effort  of  any  sort  was  excluded,  for 
men  could  practise  these  cults  without  belonging  to  them.  There  were  no  com- 
munities of  fellow  believers.  Though  the  later  thought  of  Athens  reached 
somewhat  more  general  ideas  of  God  and  his  service,  it  was  philosophy  and 
not  religion  that  it  achieved;  it  appealed  to  only  a few  thinkers  and  had  not 
the  slightest  effect  on  the  feeling  of  the  nation  — that  is,  the  Polis. 

In  the  sharpest  contrast  to  this  stands  the  visible  form  of  the  Magian  religion 

— the  Church,  the  brotherhood  of  the  faithful,  which  has  no  home  and  knows 
no  earthly  frontier,  which  believes  the  words  of  Jesus,  “when  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  My  name,  there  am  I in  the  midst  of  them/*  It  is  self- 
evident  that  every  such  believer  must  believe  that  only  one  good  and  true  God 
can  be,  and  that  the  gods  of  the  others  are  evil  and  false.  V The  relation  between 
this  God  and  man  rests,  not  in  expression  or  profession,  but  in  the  secret  force, 
the  magic,  of  certain  symbolic  performances,  which  if  they  are  to  be  effective 
must  be  exactly  known  in  form  and  significance  and  practised  accordingly. 
The  knowledge  of  this  significance  belongs  to  the  Church  — - in  fact,  it  is  the 
Church  itself,  qua  community  of  the  instructed.  And,  therefore,  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  every  Magian  religion  lies  not  in  a cult,  but  in  a doctrine,  in  fbe 
creed. 

As  long  as  the  Classical  remained  spiritually  strong,  pseudomorphosis  of  all 
the  Churches  of  the  East  into  the  style  of  the  West  continued.  This  is  a most 
important  aspect  of  Syncretism.  The  Persian  religion  enters  in  the  shape  of  the 
Mithras  cult,  the  Chaldean-Syrian  element  as  the  cults  of  the  star-gods  and 
Baals  (Jupiter  Dolichenus,  Sabaisius,  Sol  Invictus,  Atargatis),  the  Jewish  religion 
in  the  form  of  a Yahweh-cult  (for  no  other  name  can  be  applied  to  the  Egyptian 
communities  of  the  Ptolemaic  period  Oa  primitive  Early-Christianity  too 

— as  the  Pauline  Epistles  and  the  Catacombs  of  Rome  clearly  show  — took 
substance  as  a Jesus-cult.  And  however  loudly  each  of  these  various  religions 
(which  from  about  Hadrian’s  time  drove  the  genuine  old  Classical  deities  com- 
pletely into  the  background)  might  proclaim  itself  as  the  revelation  of  the 
one  true  faith  — Isis  styled  herself  deorum  dearumque  facies  uniformis  — in  reality 
they  carry,  one  and  all,  marks  of  the  Classical  separatism  — that  is,  they 
multiply  to  infinity;  every  community  stands  for  itself  and  is  local;  all  the 
temples,  catacombs,  Mithrasa,  house  chapels,  are  holy  places  to  which  (in 

^ Not  “non-existent."  It  would  be  a misconception  of  the  Magian  world-feeling  to  attach 
a Faustian-dynamic  meaning  to  the  phrase  “true  God."  In  combating  the  worship  of  godlings,  the 
reality  of  godlings  and  daemons  is  presupposed.  The  Israelite  prophets  never  dreamed  of  denying 
the  Baals,  and  similarly  Isis  and  Mithras  for  the  Early  Christians,  Jehovah  for  the  Christian  Mar- 
cion,  Jesus  for  the  Manichaeans,  arc  devilish,  but  perfectly  teal,  powers.  Dishelieving  in  them  would 
have  had  no  meaning  for  the  Magian  soul  — what  was  required  was  that  one  should  not  turn  to  them. 
To  use  an  expression  now  long  current,  it  is  "Hcnotheism"  and  not  Monotheism. 

® Schiirer,  Geschichte  des  judischen  Volk&s  im  Zeitalter  Jesu  Christie  III,  499;  Wcndland,  Die 
hellenistisch-fomische  Kultuti  p.  192.. 


ZOl 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

feelmg,  even  though  not  in  formal  expression)  the  deity  is  considered  to  be 
attached.^  Nevertheless,  there  is  Magian  feeling  even  in  this  piety.  Classical 
cults  sitepracmed,  and  one  may  practise  as  many  of  them  as  one  pleases,  but  of 
these  newer,  a man  belongs  to  one  and  one  alone.  In  the  old,  propaganda  is  un- 
thinkable; in  the  new  it  goes  without  saying,  and  the  purport  of  religious 
exercises  tends  more  and  more  to  the  doctrinal  side. 

From  the  second  century  onwards,  with  the  fading  of  the  Apollinian  and  the 
flowering  of  the  Magian  soul,  the  relations  are  reversed.  The  consequences 
of  the  Pseudomorphosis  continue,  but  it  is  now  cults  of  the  West  which  tend  to 
become  a new  Church  of  the  East  — that  is,  from  the  sum  of  separate  cults  there 
evolves  a community  of  those  who  believe  in  these  gods  and  their  rituals  — 
and  so  there  arises,  by  processes  like  those  of  the  Early  Persian  and  the  Early 
Judaic,  a Magian  Greek  nationality.  Out  of  the  rigorously  established  forms 
of  detail-procedure  in  sacrifices  and  mysteries  grows  a sort  of  dogma  concerning 
the  inner  significance  of  these  acts.  The  cults  can  now  represent  each  other, 
and  men  no  longer  practise  or  perform  them  in  the  old  way,  but  become  “ ad- 
herents’' of  them.  And  the  little  god  of  the  place  becomes  — without  the 
gravity  of  the  change  being  noticed  by  anyone  — the  great  God  really  present 
in  the  place. 

Carefully  as  Syncretism  has  been  examined  in  recent  years,  the  clue  to  its 
development  — the  transformation  of  Eastern  Churches  into  Western  cults, 
and  then  the  reverse  process  of  transformation  of  Western  cults  into  Eastern 
Churches  — has  been  missed. ^ Yet  without  this  key  it  is  quite  impossible 
to  understand  the  religious  history  of  Early  Christianity.  The  battle  that  in 
Rome  was  between  Christ  and  Mithras  as  cult-deities  took  the  form,  east  of 
Antioch,  of  a contest  between  the  Persian  and  the  Christian  Churches.  But  the 
heaviest  battle  that  Christianity  had  to  fight,  after  it  came  itself  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Pseudomorphosis  and  began  to  develop  spiritually  with  its  face 
to  the  West,  was  not  that  against  the  true  Classical  deities.  With  these  it  was 
never  face  to  face,  for  the  public  city-cults  had  long  been  inwardly  dead  and 
possessed  no  hold  whatever  on  men’s  souls.  The  formidable  enemy  was  Pagan- 
ism, or  Hellenism,  emerging  as  a powerful  new  Church  and  born  of  the  selfsame 
spirit  as  Christianity  itself.  In  the  end  there  were  in  the  east  of  the  Roman 
Empire  not  one  cult-Church,  but  two,  and  if  one  of  these  comprised  exclusively 
the  followers  of  Christ,  the  other,  too,  was  made  up  of  communities  which, 
under  a thousand  different  labels,  consciously  worshipped  one  and  the  same 
divine  principle. 

^ Contrast  with  this  the  exactly  opposite  process  in  Jewry  before  the  Pseudomorphosis  had 
begun  to  aflfcct  it,  — to  wit,  the  battle  against  the  local  “high  places”  and  the  concentration  of 
sanctity  in  Jerusalem.  — Tr. 

® With  the  result  that  Syncretism  is  presented  as  a mere  hotchpotch  of  every  conceivable  religion. 
Nothing  is  further  from  the  truth.  The  process  of  taking  shape  moved  first  firom  East  to  West  and 
then  from  West  to  East. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  103 

Much  has  been  written  on  the  Classical  toleration.  The  nature  of  a religion 
may  perhaps  be  most  clearly  seen  in  the  limits  of  its  tolerance,  and  there  were 
such  limits  in  Classical  religions  as  in  others.  It  was,  indeed,  one  essential 
character  of  these  religions  that  they  were  numerous,  and  another  that  they 
were  religions  of  pure  performance;  for  them,  therefore,  the  question  of  tolera- 
tion, as  the  word  is  usually  understood,  did  not  arise.  But  respect  for  the 
cult-formalities  as  such  was  postulated  and  required,  and  many  a philosopher, 
even  many  an  unwitting  stranger,  who  infringed  this  law  by  word  or  deed, 
was  made  to  realize  the  limits  of  Classical  toleration.  The  reciprocal  perse- 
cutions of  the  Magian  Churches  are  something  different  from  this;  there  it  was 
the  duty  of  the  henotheist  to  his  own  faith  that  forbade  him  to  recognize  false 
tenets.  Classical  cults  would  have  tolerated  the  Jesus-cult  as  one  of  their  own 
number.  But  the  cnlt-Church  was  bound  to  attack  the  Jesus-Church.  All  the 
great  persecutions  of  Christians  (corresponding  therein  exactly  to  the  later 
persecutions  of  Paganism)  came,  not  from  the  “Roman”  State,  but  from  this 
cult-Church,  and  they  were  only  political  inasmuch  as  the  cult-Church  was 
both  nation  and  fatherland.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  mask  of  Caesar- 
worship  covered  two  religious  usages.  In  the  Classical  cities  of  the  West,  Rome 
above  all,  the  special  cult  of  the  Dims  arose  as  a last  expression  of  that  Euclidean 
feeling  which  required  that  there  should  be  legal  and  therefore  sacral  means 
of*  communication  between  the  body-unit  man  and  the  body-unit  God.  In 
the  East,  on  the  other  hand,  the  product  was  a creed  of  Caesar  as  Saviour,  God- 
man,  Messiah  of  all  Syncretists,  which  this  Church  brought  to  expression  in  a 
supremely  national  form.  The  sacrifice  for  the  Emperor  was  the  most  im- 
portant sacrament  of  the  Church  — exactly  corresponding  to  the  baptism  of  the 
Christians  — and  it  is  easy,  therefore,  to  understand  the  symbolic  significance 
in  the  days  of  persecution  of  the  command  and  the  refusal  to  do  these  acts. 
All  these  Churches  had  their  sacraments:  holy  meals  like  the  Haoma-drinking 
of  the  Persians,^  the  Passover  of  the  Jews,  the  Lord's  Supper  of  the  Christians, 
similar  rites  for  Attis  and  Mithras,  and  baptismal  ceremonies  amongst  the 
Mandasans,  the  Christians,  and  the  worshippers  of  Isis  and  Cybele.  Indeed, 
the  individual  cults  of  the  Pagan  Church  might  be  regarded  almost  as  sects  and 
orders  ■—  a view  which  would  lead  to  a much  better  understanding  of  their 
reciprocal  propaganda. 

All  true  Classical  mysteries,  such  as  those  of  Eleusis  and  those  founded  by 
the  Pythagoreans  in  the  South-Italian  cities  about  500  b.c.,  had  been  place- 
bound,^  and  had  consisted  in  some  symbolical  act  or  process.  Within  the  field 
of  the  Pseudomorphosis  these  freed  themselves  from  their  localities;  they  could 

1 The  Haoma  plant  symbolized  the  Tree  of  Life  (Gaokcrena)  like  the  Soma  plant  of  Brahman- 
ism.— Tr.'  , , ■ ■ / _ ,,  , ■ ' ■ 

^ Hence  the  expression  “profaning  **  the  mysteries,  which  meant,  not  revealing  them,  but 
bringing  them  outside  their  fane.  ^ — Tr. 


2.04  the  decline  of  THE  WEST 

be  perfomed  wherever  initiates  were  gathered,  and  had  now  as  their  object  the 
Magian  ecstasy  and  the  ascetic  change  of  life.  The  visitors  to  the  holy  place 
had  transformed  themselves  into  practising  Orders.  The  community  of  the 
Neopythagoreans,  formed  about  50  b.c.  and  closely  related  to  the  Jewish 
Essenes,  is  anything  but  a Classical  “school  of  philosophy'’;  it  is  a pure  mo- 
nastic order,  and  it  is  not  the  only  such  order  in  the  Syncretic  movement  that 
anticipated  the  ideals  of  the  Christian  hermits  and  the  Mohammedan  dervishes. 
These  Pagan  Churches  had  their  anchorites,  saints,  prophets,  miraculous 
conversions,  scriptures,  and  revelations.^  In  the  significance  of  images  there 
came  about  a very  remarkable  transformation,  which  still  awaits  research. 
The  greatest  of  Plotinus’s  followers,  lamblichus,  finally,  about  a.d.  300, 
evolved  a mighty  system  of  orthodox  theology,  ordered  hierarchy,  and  rigid 
ritual  for  the  Pagan  Church,  and  his  disciple  Julian  devoted,  and  finally  sacri- 
ficed, his  life  to  the  attempt  to  establish  this  Church  for  ail  eternity.^  He  sought 
even  to  create  cloisters  for  meditating  men  and  women  and  to  introduce  ec- 
clesiastical penance.  This  great  work  was  supported  by  a great  enthusiasm 
which  rose  to  the  height  of  martyrdom  and  endured  long  after  the  Emperor’s 
death.  Inscriptions  exist  which  can  hardly  be  translated  but  by  the  formula: 
“There  is  but  one  god  and  Julian  is  his  Prophet.”  ^ Ten  years  more,  and  this 
Church  would  have  become  a historic,  permanent  fact.  In  the  end  not  only 
its  power,  but  also  in  important  details  its  very  form  and  content  were  in- 
herited by  Christianity.  It  is  often  stated  that  the  Roman  Church  adapted 
itself  to  the  structure  of  the  Roman  State;  this  is  not  quite  correct.  The  latter 
structure  was  itself  by  hypothesis  a Church.  There  was  a period  when  the  two 
were  in  touch  — Constantine  the  Great  acted  simultaneously  as  convener  of 
the  Council  of  Nicasa  and  as  Pontifex  Maximus,  and  his  sons,  zealous  Christians 
as  they  were,  made  him  Divus  and  paid  to  him  the  prescribed  rites.  St.  Augus- 
tine dared  to  assert  that  the  true  religion  had  existed  before  the  coming  of 
Christianity  in  the  form  of  the  Classical.^ 

For  the  understanding  of  Judaism  as  a whole  between  Cyrus  and  Titus  it  is 
necessary  constantly  to  bear  in  mind  three  facts,  of  which  scholarship  is  quite 
aware,  but  which,  owing  to  philological  and  theological  parPi  pris,  it  refuses 
to  admit  as  factors  in  its  discussions.  First,  the  Jews  are  a “ nation  without  a 
land,”  a consensus,  and  in  the  midst,  moreover,  of  a world  of  pure  nations  of 
the  same  type.  Secondly,  Jerusalem  is  indeed  a Mecca,  a holy  centre,  but  it  is 

^ J.  Geffckca,  Der  Ausgang  des  gnechisch-rmnischtn  Heidentums  (19x0),  pp.  197,  ct  seq. 

2 GefFcken,  op.  cit.,  pp.  131,  et  scq. 

® Geffckcn,  op.  ck.,  p,  X9X,  note  149. 

* * ‘ Res  ipsa,  quee  nunc  religio  Christiana  nuncupafur,  erat  apud  antiquos  nec  defecit  ah  initio  generis  humani, 
qiiousqm  Christus  veniret  in  carnem.  Unde  mra  rtligh,  jam  erat  coepit  appellari  Christiana''  (Retracta- 
tiones,  I, 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  105 

neither  the  home  nor  the  spiritual  focus  of  the  people.  Lastly,  the  Jews  are  a 
peculiar  phenomenon  in  world-history  only  so  long  as  we  insist  on  treating 
them  as  such. 

It  is  true  that  the  post-exilic  Jews,  in  contradistinction  to  the  pre-exilic 
Israelites  are  — as  Hugo  Winckler  was  the  first  to  recognize  — a people  of 
quite  new  type.  But  they  are  not  the  only  representatives  of  the  type.  The 
Aramasan  world  began  in  those  days  to  arrange  itself  in  a great  number  of 
such  peoples,  including  Persians  and  Chaldeans,^  all  living  in  the  same  dis- 
trict, yet  in  stringent  aloofness  from  each  other,  and  even  then  practising  the 
truly  Arabian  way  of  life  that  we  call  the  ghetto. 

The  first  heralds  of  the  new  soul  were  the  pochette  religions^  with  their  mag- 
nificent inwardness,  which  began  to  arise  about  700  b.c.  and  challenged  the 
primeval  practices  of  the  people  and  their  rulers.  They,  too,  are  an  essentially 
Aramaean  phenomenon.  The  more  I ponder  Amos,  Isaiah,  and  Jeremiah  on  the 
one  hand,  Zarathustra  on  the  other,  the  more  closely  related  they  appear  to  me 
to  be.  What  seems  to  separate  them  is  not  their  new  beliefs,  but  the  objects 
of  their  attack.  The  first  battled  with  that  savage  old-Israel  religion,  which 
in  fact  is  a whole  bundle  of  religious  elements  ^ — belief  in  holy  stones  and 
trees,  innumerable  place-gods  (Dan,  Bethel,  Hebron,  Shechem,  Bcersheba, 
Gilgal),  a single  Yahweh  (or  Elohim),  whose  name  covers  a multitude  of  most 
heterogeneous  numina,  ancestor-worship  and  human  sacrifices,  dervish-dancing 
and  sacral  prostitution  — intermixed  with  indistinct  traditions  of  Moses  and 
Abraham  and  many  customs  and  sagas  of  the  Late  Babylonian  world,  now  after 
long  establishment  in  Canaan  degenerated  and  hardened  into  peasant  forms. 
The  second  combated  the  old  Vedic  beliefs  of  heroes  and  Vikings,  similarly 
coarsened,  no  doubt,  and  certainly  needing  to  be  recalled  to  actuality,  time  and 
again,  by  glorifications  of  the  sacred  cattle  and  of  the  care  thereof.  Zarathustra 
lived  about  600  b.c.,  often  in  want,  persecuted  and  misunderstood,  and  met  his 
end  as  an  old  man  in  war  against  the  unbelievers  ® — a worthy  contemporary 
of  the  unfortunate  Jeremiah,  who  for  his  prophesying  was  hated  by  his  country- 
men, imprisoned  by  his  king,  and  after  the  catastrophe  carried  off  by  the  fugi- 
tives to  Egypt  and  there  put  to  death.  And  it  is  my  belief  that  this  great  epoch 
brought  forth  yet  a third  prophet-religion,  the  Chaldean. 

This,  with  its  penetrating  astronomy  and  its  ever-amazing  inwardness,  was, 
I venture  to  guess,  evolved  at  that  time  and  by  creative  personalities  of  the  Isaiah 
stature  from  relics  of  the  old  Babylonian  religion.*^  About  1000,  the  Chaldeans 

^ The  name  Chaldean  signifies,  before  the  Persian  epoch,  a tribe;  later,  a religious  society. 
See  p.  175  above. 

^ A.  Bercholet,  KMltm'geschichte  Israels  (1919),  pp.  2.53,  et  scq.  [Clear  and  useful  English  manuals 
are  G.  Moore,  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament;  R.  H.  Charles,  Bettoeen  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments. 
See  also  the  article  “Hebrew  Religion”  in  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.  — Tr.] 

® According  to  Williams  Jackson’s  Z^oaster  (1901). 

^ Research  has  treated  the  Chaldean,  like  the  Talmudic,  as  a stepchild.  The  investigator’s 
whole  attention  has  been  concentrated  on  the  religion  of  the  Babylonian  Culture,  and  the  Chaldean 


the  decline  of  the  west 

were. gtoapofArWc-sp«kmgmbcsUk  the  Istadit«,».d^^ 

:Sr  Ae  mother  toegee  o,  o^.'  aS 

Selcudd  ti-s  ^ Xo™  2 Ld  religio..  which 

especially  to  its  priests.  ^ ^ Tt  k the  deepest  of  all  interpreta- 

befote  Hdnmerabi  the  ®‘by><>r°”“,rr„er,^  .2dSet  working  rhLin, 

to  their  very  latest  pn  astronomy  worthy  to  be 

that  yter  the  technique  of  obse^ation  of  marvel- 

called  ™ the  Babylonian  moon-week  by  the  planet-week. 

Ishtar,  the  most  popular  figure  ^ ^ ever  dying  and  ever-revived 

fulness  now  the  henotheistic  feeling  announced 

£2f  fS^X^dotlXctr'S^dok.  was  tho  ooe  .r«  g^d  th^ 

god  of  mercy,  and  Neho,  the  ^ world-rulers,  but  they 

mankind.  For  a c^ytKarSW)  "X  'm^es  were  being  built, 

were  also  the  heralds  of  t .ocession-orayer  of  Nebuchadueazat,  the 

22e22.t™of  still  eLaL.  and  in  depth  a^^p« 

it  is  in  nowise  sutpasrf  '^“^rtofSi^TnS^stt^^^^  .0  those 

rf  tf.e'jews”  knorthe  'sin  of  which  man  is  unconscious  and  the 

Se‘i2  “;£phe.ic  teachings  is  already  Maglan  There  is  ».  god 

_ he  called  Tahweh,  Ahutanumda  or  Mardnk-B.al  “ 

r ^ ^11  other  deities  are  either  impotent  or  evil.  To  this  doctrine  there 

2Sed  itself  the  hope  of  a Messiah,  very  de«-  in  ^ “ 

everywhere  during  the  next  centuries,  under  pressure  of  an  inner  necessity. 

„ i»  dying  wh..  S"«brixS1^’ ““ Ui  « 

s“!r»5‘c  =;’S“'S  "ii;  tf  “ ““»>  T ““  t'-*-  »““• 

Hauppprohleme  der  Gnosis,  1907)  to  b^ve  been  exhausted. 

has  been  clearly  recognwed  by  nezo  1.  Jevelooed  bv  different  Classical  savants  according 

g-i  P’eS  " 

■?  ■■B.bylo.i.a  md  Awyriu  Mglo."  tmd  "Marink”  in  Et,.  &»■, » 

^ — .'Tf 

* 4 j.  Hchn,  Uymnen  and  GebePe  an  Marduk  (1905). 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  107 

is  the  basic  idea  of  Magian  religionvfor  it  contains  implicitly  the  conception 
of  the  world-histofical  struggle  between  Good  and  Evil,  with  the  power  of  Evil 
prevailing  in  the  middle  period,  and  the  Good  finally  triumphant  on  the  Day 
of  Judgment.  This  moralization  of  history  is  common  to  Persians,  Chaldees, 
and  Jews.  But  with  its  coming,  the  idea  of  the  localized  people  ipo  facto 
vanished  and  the  genesis  of  Magian  nations  without  earthly  homes  and  bound- 
aries was  at  hand.  The  idea  of  the  Chosen  People  emerged.^  But  it  is  easy  to 
understand  that  men  of  strong  blood,  and  in  particular  the  great  families,  found 
these  too  spiritual  ideas  repugnant  to  their  natures  and  harked  back  to  the  stout 
old  tribal  faiths.  According  to  Cumont’s  researches  the  religion  of  the  Persian 
kings  was  polytheistic  and  did  not  possess  the  Haoma  sacrament  — that  is,  it 
was  not  wholly  Zoroastrian.  The  same  is  true  of  most  of  the  kings  of  Israel, 
and  in  all  probability  also  of  the  last  Chaldean  Nabu-Nabid  (Nabonidus), 
whose  overthrow  by  Cyrus  and  his  own  subjects  was  in  fact  made  possible  by 
his  rejection  of  the  Marduk  faith.  And  it  was  in  the  Captivity  that  circum- 
cision and  the  (Chaldean)  Sabbath  were  first  acquired,  as  rites,  by  the  Jews. 

The  Babylonian  exile,  however,  did  set  up  an  important  difference  between 
the  Jews  and  the  Persians,  in  respect,  not  of  the  ultimate  truths  of  conscious 
piety,  but  of  all  the  facts  of  actuality  and  consequently  men’s  inward  attitude  to 
these  facts.  It  was  the  Yahweh  believers  who  prmitted  to  go  home  and 
the  adherents  of  Ahuramazda  who  allowed  them  to  do  so.  Of  two  small  tribes 
that  two  hundred  years  before  had  probably  possessed  equal  numbers  of  fighting 
men,  the  one  had  taken  possession  of  a world  while  Darius  crossed  the 
Danube  in  the  north,  his  power  extended  in  the  south  through  eastern  Arabia 
to  the  island  of  Sokotra  on  the  Somali  coast  ^ — and  the  other  had  become  an 
entirely  unimportant  pawn  of  alien  policy. 

This  is  what  made  one  religion  so  lordly,  the  other  so  humble.  Let  the 
student  read,  in  contrast  to  Jeremiah,  the  great  Behistun  inscription  ^ of  Darius 
— what  a splendid  pride  of  the  King  in  his  victorious  god ! And  how  despairing 
are  the  arguments  with  which  the  Israelite  prophets  sought  to  preserve  intact 

^ For  Chaldeans  and  Persians  there  was  no  need  to  trouble  here  about  proof  — they  had  by  their 
God  conquered  the  world.  But  the  Jews  had  only  their  literature  to  cling  to,  and  this  accordingly 
turned  to  theoretical  proof  in  the  absence  of  positive.  In  the  last  analysis,  this  unique  national  treas- 
ure owes  its  origin  to  the  constant  need  of  reacting  against  self-depreciation.  [For  example,  the 
repeated  restatement  of  the  date  of  the  Messiah’s  advent  in  the  successive  works  of  the  age  of  the 
".'prophets.  “—'Tf-] ; 

^ Glaser,  Diif  Ahessinkr  in  Arahim  md  in  Afrtka  (1895),  p.  1x4.  Glaser  is  convinced  that  Abyssin- 
ian, Pehlevi,  and  Persian  cuneiform  inscriptions  of  the  highest  importance  await  discovery  there, 

^ The  inscription  and  sculptures  of  Behistun  (on  an  almost  inaccessible  cliff  in  the  Zagros  range 
on  the  Baghdad-Hamadan  road)  were  reinvestigated  by  a British  Museum  expedition  in  1904;  see 
The  Inscription  of  Darius  the  Great  at  Behistun  (London,  1907).  “Thus  saith  Darius  the  King.  That 
what  I have  done  I have  done  altogether  by  the  grace  of  Ahuramazda.  Ahuramazda  and  the  other 
gods  that  be,  brought  aid  to  me.  For  this  reason  did  Ahuramazda  and  the  other  gods  that  be  bring 
aid  to  me  because  I was  not  hostile  nor  a liar  nor  a wrongdoer,  neither  I nor  my  family,  but  accord- 
ing to  Rectitude  have  I ruled”  (A,  V.  Williams  Jackson,  Fersia  Fast  and  Freseni).  — Tr. 


the  decline  of  the  west 

. J U with  every  Jewish  eye  turned  by  the 

the  image  of  their  god^  docttine  the  pure  Judaic  prophecy  (Amos, 

Persian  victory  to  the  Zoroastrian  do  , ^ t i Ezekiel,  Zecha- 

Hosea,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah)  of  Satan,  of  archangels,  of  the 

riah).  All  the  new  presentations  of  the  conmon  worU- 

seven  heavens,  of  the  last  bailed  as  Messiah.  Did  the  great 

feeling.  In  Isaiah  xli  appca  y pnlj^htenment  from  a Zoroastrian  dis- 

composer  of  Deutero-Isaiah  draw  his  of  a feeling  of  the 

ciple?  Is  it  possible  that  Persians  released  ^ 

invyard  relationship  of  their  and  expressed  a common 

shared  one  popular  idea  as  p.  „,V,1  relisions  of  unbelievers  generally, 

hatred  of  the  old  Babylonian  and  Classical  religions,  ot  ^ , 

which  they  did  not  feel  towards  one  ano  “return  from  captivity”  also 

we  m 

from  the  point  of  view  y or  regarded  them  as  mere  visions  and 

in  reality  far  removed  from  these  “Ynfand  no  doubt  the  nascent  land- 

dreams;  and  the  solid  prince  of  their  own,  the  Resh 

„iseocr.cy  qv.ie.ly  X ^Xel  "home-  were 

Galutha,  whose  capital  numbered  with  their  wives 

the  small  minority,  the  stubborn  the  zeal^ots.  iney 

tirth  5 Ar^ottl^  anl'akyonf^hrconf^^^  these  settlers  and  them  destiny 
twentieth  or  the  total,  au  y . the  inner  meaning  of  all 

with  Jewry  .s  . wh*  hW  . -J«W(r  -<*«>  f. 

foUowmg  X rhis  life  with  rerpect,  cer.eialy  did  ao. 

the  nation  as  a whole,  while  g f.  heiress  of  prophecy,  bios- 

share  ia  it.  lo  the  E».  apocjyptm  A which  we  still 

somed  ricUy.  It  was  * 8“'““'  p ; character  Islamic  and  de- 

"rdif„aTeS-“"  ‘t  r 

cidedly  un-Jewisn  wmic  nver  all  the  literatures  of  the 

Judith,  Tobit,  ^f'^"’  y^2a"onH  ie  Law  flourished;  the  Talmudic  spirit 
“Arabian  world.  In  Judea  o^  y made  flesh  in  the 

appears  first  in  Ezekiel  (chs.  xl,  et  ^ ,Ee  Tannaim 

scr Jes  (Sopherim)  and  devLped  the  Mishnah.  Neither  the 

“oat  .he  tIpU  lamr^pted  this  ahsmac. 

. Isddr  al-lwi.  Fo.  <l>e 

article  “Isaiaii”  tU  Oli  restmnentjch.  XVI.  - Tr. 

4t  'Tf  * 

agere  in  the  Persian  Empire.  He  le  otIv  difference  between  these  is  in  their 

® sAs  Christian  and  Jewish  theology  ^ “CTure  (recast  in  Judea  as  the 

respective  interpretations  of  the  towards  Evangelism,  the  others  towards  Talmudism. 

"“rz  A'Sr'a  .r..” 

» LT4e  ^tkles  “Tobit.”  etc.,  in  Je^b  En^clotad^a  and  E«tj.  BMca.  Tr. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  209 

scholarship.  Jerusalem  became  for  the  rigid  believer  a Mecca,  and  his  Koran 
was  a Code  of  laws  to  which  was  gradually  added  a whole  primitive  history  com- 
pounded of  Chaldeo-Persian  motives  reset  according  to  Pharisaic  ideas.^  But 
in  this  atmosphere  there  was  no  room  for  a worldly  art,  poetry,  or  learning. 
All  that  the  Talmud  contains  of  astronomical,  medical,  and  juristic  knowledge 
is  exclusively  of  Mesopotamian  origin.^  It  is  probable,  too,  that  it  was  in 
Mesopotamia,  and  before  the  end  of  the  Captivity,  that  there  began  that  Chai- 
dean-Persian-Jewish  formation  of  sects  which  developed  into  the  formation  of 
great  religions  at  the  beginning  of  the  Magian  Culture,  and  reached  its  climax  in 
the  teaching  of  Mani.  “The  Law  and  the  Prophets*'  — these  two  nouns  pactkallj 
define  the  difference  between  Judea  and  Mesopotamia.  In  the  late  Persian  and  in  every 
other  Magian  theology  both  tendencies  are  united;  it  is  only  in  the  case  here 
considered  that  they  were  separated  in  space.  The  decisions  of  Jerusalem  were 
recognized  everywhere,  but  it  is  a question  how  widely  they  were  obeyed. 
Even  as  near  as  Galilee  the  Pharisees  were  the  object  of  suspicion,  while  in 
Babylonia  no  Rabbi  could  be  consecrated.  For  the  great  Gamaliel,  Paul's 
teacher,  it  was  a title  to  fame  that  his  rulings  were  followed  by  the  Jews  “ even 
abroad.  ’ ’ How  independent  was  the  life  of  the  Jews  in  Egypt  is  shown  by  the  re- 
cently discovered  documents  of  Elephantine  and  Assuan.^  About  170,  Onias  asked 
the  King  for  permission  to  build  a temple  “ according  to  the  measurements  of  the 
Temple  in  Jerusalem,"  on  the  ground  that  the  numerous  non-conforming  temples 
that  existed  were  the  cause  of  eternal  bickerings  amongst  the  communities. 

One  other  subject  must  be  considered.  Jewry,  like  Persia,  had  since  the 
Exile  increased  enormously  beyond  the  old  small  clan-limits;  this  was  owing  to 
conversions  and  secessions  — the  only  form  of  conquest  open  to  a landless  nation 
and^  therefore,  natural  and  obvious  to  the  Magian  religions.  In  the  north  it  very 
early  drove,  through  the  Jew  State  of  Adiabene,  to  the  Caucasus;  in  the  south 
(probably  along  the  Persian  Gulf)  it  penetrated  to  Saba;  in  the  west  it  was  dom- 
inant in  Alexandria,  Cyrene,  and  Cyprus.  The  administration  of  Egypt  and 
the  policy  of  the  Parthian  Empire  were  largely  in  Jewish  hands. 

But  this  movement  came  out  of  Mesopotamia  alone,  and  the  spirit  in  it  was  the 
Apocalyptic  and  not  the  Talmudic.  Jerusalem  was  occupied  in  creating  yet 
mdre  legal  barriers  against  the  unbeliever.  It  was  not  enough  even  to  abandon 
the  practice  of  making  converts.  A Pharisee  permitted  himself  to  summon  the 
universally  beloved  King  Hyreanus  (135-106)  to  lay  down  the  office  of  High 
Priest  because  his  mother  had  once  been  in  the  power  of  the  infidels.^  This  is 

^ If  the  assumption  of  a Chaldean  prophecy  corresponding  to  Isaiah  and  Zarathustra  be  correct, 
it  is  to  this  young,  inwardly  cognate,  and  contemporary  astral  religion  (and  not  to  the  Babylonian) 
that  Genesis  owes  its  amazingly  profound  cosmogony,  just  as  it  owes  to  the  Persian  religion  its 
visions  of  the  end  of  the  world. 

^ S..  Funk,  Dis  Entstehmg  des  Talmuds  (1919),  p.  106. 

® E.  Sachau,  Aramaisch  Papyros  und  Ostraha  aus  Elephantine  (1911). 

^ Josephus, 13, 10. 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

wKirh  in  the  primitive  Christian  brotherhood  of  Judea 

the  same  narrowness  which  P Gosnel  to  the  heathen.  In  the 

took  the  form  of  opposing  t anyone  to  draw  such  barriers, 

East  It  would  simp  y ^hole  idea  of  the  Magian  nation.  But  in  that 

which  were  contrary  to  the  whole  idea  s Synedrion  in 

very  fact  was  based  /^'^TrS'ivious  autarky,  but  politically,  and 

Jerusalem  might  possess  unc  a Galutha  was  a very  different  mat- 

terforc  historic  Jly.  the jowcr  of  the  R«h  h.  y 

ter.  Chrisden  aod  Jewtsh  “„r  f Jt  .h.t  the  petsecudon 

oot  eglsfjew^-  bet  ..dost  Jodee. 
tnSh,in,s'.^oeh0.her^.of.^^^^ 

He  desttuettoo  of  Jeresden,  ‘ "W  It  i, 

moreover  that  was  spiritua  y an  p the  Dispersion’*  since  that  day,  for 

not  true  that  the  Jewish  peop  e as  ^ Persian  and  others)  in  a form  which 

it  had  lived  for  centuries  (and  so  too  had  Ae  ^ li„le  the 

was  independent  of  country.  n t , fewry  which  Judea  thought  of  and 

impression  ^hTTiew  of  the  heathen  and  the  ruin  of  the  Sanctuary 

treated  as  an  adjunct.  I®.  J jg  of  ii^  ^ a bitter  revenge  was 

T trtS  wi  the  idci  of  Jewry  «d 

taken  for  it,  but  me  laeai  out  5 ^ r^ni<=i’s  dav  and  in  ours,  was  a reality 

rhe  C.  spiri.  of  , ode.  the.  rf 

first  time  completely  actualized  this  ideal.  ^ Ukeration  of  Tewrv. 

^ Fnr  Vesoasian’s  War,  directed  against  Judea,  was  a liberation  ot  J ry 
In  the  first  place  it  ended  both  the  claim  of  the  people  of  this  j^tty  distrmt  to  be 
In  the  first  place,  nretensions  of  their  bald  spirituality  to  equivalence 

the  genuine  nation,  and  the  pre^^^^  The  research,  thLcholasticism,  and  the 

mysticism  hi?  the^'oriental  academies  entered  into  possession  gE 

for  instance  the  judge  Kama  — the  contemporary,  more  or  less,  _of  Ulp 
Tnd  ?apfoim  - foriulated  at  the  academy  of  Nehardea  the  first  code  of  cm 
law*  fo  the  second  place,  it  rescued  this  religion  from  the  dangers  of  tha 
pseudomorphosis  to  vHiich  Christianity  in  that  same  ^riod  was 
Sin^  B.C.  there  had  ezisted'a  half-Hellenisuc  Jewish  literature.  The 

1 Much  say.  the  destruction  of  the  Vatican  would  be  felt  by  the  Catholic  Church, 
s See  p.  198.  — Tf. 

» Cf.  p.  69- 


XII 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES 

“Preacher”  (Ecclesiastes,  Koheleth)  contains  Pyrrhonic  ideas,^  The  Wisdom 
of  Solomon,  x Maccabees,  Theodotion,  the  Aristeas  Letter,  etc.,  follow;  there 
ate  things  like  the  Menander  collection  of  Maxims,  as  to  which  it  is  impossible 
to  say  whether  they  ought  to  be  regarded  as  Jewish  or  as  Greek.  There  were, 
about  i6o,  high  priests  who  were  so  Hellenistic  in  spirit  that  they  combated  the 
Jewish  religion,  and  later  there  were  rulers  like  Hyrcanus  and  Herod  who  did  the 
same  by  political  methods.  This  danger  came  to  an  end  instantly  and  for  good 
in  A.D..70. 

In  the  time  of  Jesus  there  were  in  Jerusalem  three  tendencies  which  can  be 
described  as  generally  Aramaean,  represented  respectively  by  the  Pharisees,  the 
Sadducees,  and  the  Essenes.  Although  the  connotations  of  these  names  varied, 
and  although  both  in  Christian  and  in  Jewish  research  most  diverse  views  are 
held  about  them,  it  may  at  any  rate  be  said  that  the  first  of  these  tendencies 
is  found  in  greatest  purity  in  Judaism,  the  second  in  Chaldeanism,  the  third  in 
Hellenism.^  Essene  is  the  rise  of  the  cult  (almost  the  Order)  of  Mithras  in  the 
east  of  Asia  Minor.  The  Sadducees,  although  in  Jerusalem  they  appear  as  a 
small  and  distinguished  group  — Josephus  compares  them  with  the  Epicureans 
— are  thoroughly  Aramaean  in  their  apocalyptic  and  eschatological  views,  in 
virtue  of  a certain  element  which  makes  them,  so  to  say,  the  Dostoyevskis  of 
this  Early  period.  They  stand  to  the  Pharisees  in  the  relation  of  mysticism  to 
scholasticism,  of  John  to  Paul,  of  Bundahish  to  Vendidad  ® in  the  Persian  world. 
The  Apocalyptic  is  popular,  and  many  of  its  traits  are  spiritually  common  prop- 
erty throughout  the  Aramasan  world;  the  Talmudic  and  Avestan  Pharisaism 
is  exclusive  and  tries  to  rule  out  every  other  religion  with  uncompromising 
rigour. 

The  Essenes  appear  in  Jerusalem  as  a monastic  order  like  the  Neopythago- 
reans.  They  possessed  secret  texts. ^ In  the  broad  sense  they  are  representative 
of  the  Pseudomorphosis,  and  in  consequence  they  disappear  from  Jewry  com- 
pletely after  a.d,  70,  while  precisely  in  this  period  Christian  literature  was  be- 
coming purely  Greek  — not  in  the  least  of  the  causes  of  this  being  that  the 
Hellenized  Western  Jews  left  Judaism  to  retreat  into  its  East,  and  gradually 
adopted  Christianity. 

But  also  Apocalyptic,  which  is  an  expression-form  of  townlcss  and  town- 
fearing  mankind,  soon  came  to  an  end  within  the  Synagogue,  after  a last  worn 
derful  reaction  to  the  stimulus  of  the  great  catastrophe.®  When  it  had  become 
evident  that  the  teaching  of  Jesus  would  lead  not  to  a reform  of  Judaism^ 

^ Pyrrho  himself  had  studied  under  Magian  priests.  See,  for  Pyrrhonism,  En(y.  XI  cd., 
artielcs  “Scepticism,”  “Megarian  School,”  “Pyrrho.” — Tf. 

2 Schiele  (Die  ’R.eligion  in  Geschichte  md  Gegenwarf,  JJl,  8ix)  reverses  the  two  latter  names;  this, 
however,  does  not  affect  the  phenomenon  in  any  way. 

® The  Cosmogony  and  the  Law,  in  the  Zoroastrian  Scriptures.—  Tr. 

^ Bousset,  KeL  d.  Jud.,  p.  531. 

^ Baruch,  Ezra  IV  (z  Esdras),  the  original  tesEC  of  John’s  Revelation. 


212. 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

but  to  a new  religion,  and  when,  about  a.d.  ioo,  the  daily  imprecation-formula 
against  the  Jew-Christians  was  introduced,  Apocalyptic  for  the  short  remainder 
of  its  existence  resided  in  the  young  Church. 

VI 

The  incomparable  thing  which  lifted  the  infant  Christianity  out  above  all 
religions  of  this  rich  Springtime  is  the  figure  of  Jesus  . In  all  the  great  creations 
of  those  years  there  is  nothing  which  can  be  set  beside  it.  Tame  and  empty  all ' 
the  legends  and  holy  adventures  of  Mithras,  Attis,  and  Osiris  must  have  seemed 
to  any  man  reading  or  listening  to  the  still  recent  story  of  Jesus's  sufferings  — 
the  last  journey  to  Jerusalem,  the  last  anxious  supper,  the  hours  of  despair  in 
Gethsemane,  and  the  death  on  the  cross. 

Here  was  no  matter  of  philosophy.  Jesus’s  utterances,  which  stayed  in  the 
memory  of  many  of  the  devoted,  even  in  old  age,  are  those  of  a child  in  the 
midst  of  an  alien,  aged,  and  sick  world.  They  are  not  sociological  observations, 
problems,  debatings.  Like  a quiet  island  of  bliss  was  the  life  of  these  fishermen 
and  craftsmen  by  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth  in  the  midst  of  the  age  of  the  great 
Tiberius,  far  from  all  world-history  and  innocent  of  all  the  doings  of  actuality, 
while round  them  glittered  the  Hellenistic  townswith  their  theatres  and  temples, 
their  refined  Western  society,  their  noisy  mob-diversions,  their  Roman  cohorts, 
their  Greek  philosophy.  When  the  friends  and  disciples  of  the  sufferer  had 
grown  grey  and  his  brother  was  president  of  their  group  in  Jerusalem,  they  put 
together,  from  the  sayings  and  narratives  generally  current  in  their  small  com- 
munities, a biography  so  arresting  in  its  inward  appeal  that  it  evolved  a presen- 
tation-form of  its  own,  of  which  neither  the  Classical  nor  the  Arabian  Culture 
has  any  example  — the  Gospel.  Christianity  is  the  one  religion  in  the  history 
of  the  world  in  which  the  fate  of  a man  of  the  imhiediate  present  has  become  the 
emblem  and  the  central  point  of  the  whole  creation. 

A strange  excitement,  like  that  which  the  Germanic  world  experienced 
about  A.D.  looo,  ran  in  those  days  through  the  whole  Aram^an  land.  The 
Magian  soul  was  awakened.  That  element  which  lay  in  the  prophetic  religions 
like  a presentiment,  and  expressed  itself  in  Alexander ’s  time  in  metaphysical 
outlines,  came  now  to  the  state  of  fulfilment.  And  this  fulfilment  awakened, 
in  indescribable  strength,  the  primitive  feeling  of  Fear.  The  birth  of  the  Ego, 
and  of  the  world-anxiety  with  which  it  is  identical,  is  one  of  the  final  secrets 
of  humanity  and  of  mobile  life  generally.  In  front  of  the  Microcosm  there 
stands  up  a Macrocosm  wide  and  overpowering,  an  abyss  of  alien,  dax^ling 
existence  and  activity  that  frightens  the  small  lonely  ego  back  into  itself. 
Even  in  the  blackest  hours  of  life  no  adult  experiences  fear  like  the  fear  which 
sometimes  overpowers  a child  in  the  crisis  of  awakening.  Over  the  dawn  of 
the  new  Culture  likewise  lay  this  deathly  anxiety.  In  this  early  morning  of 
Magian  world-feeling,  timorous  and  hesitant  and  ignorant  of  itself,  young 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  113 

eyes  saw  the  end  of  the  world  at  hand  — it  is  the  first  thought  in  which  every 
Culture  to  this  day  has  come  to  knowledge  of  itself.  All  but  the  shallower 
souls  trembled  before  revelations,  miracles,  glimpses  into  the  very  fundament  of 
things.  Men  now  lived  and  thought  only  in  apocalyptic  images.  Actuality 
became  appearance.  Strange  and  terrifying  visions  were  told  mysteriously  by 
one  to  another,  read  out  from  fantastic  veiled  texts,  and  seized  at  once  with  an 
immediate  inward  certainty.  These  writings  travelled  from  community  to 
community,  village  to  village,  and  it  is  quite  impossible  to  assign  them  to  any 
one  particular  religion.  ^ Their  colouring  is  Persian,  Chaldean,  Jewish,  but  they 
have  absorbed  all  that  was  circulating  in  men’s  minds.  Whereas  the  canonical 
books  are  national,  the  apocalyptic  literature  is  international  in  the  literal 
sense  of  the  word.  It  is  there,  and  no  one  seems  to  have  composed  it.  Its 
content  is  fluid  — to-day  it  reads  thus  and  to-morrow  otherwise.  But  this 
does  not  mean  that  it  is  a “ poetry”  — it  is  not.^  These  creations  resemble  the 
terrible  figures  of  the  Romanesque  cathedral-porches  in  France,  which  also  are 
not  **  art,”  but  fear  turned  into  stone.  Everyone  knows  those  angels  and  devils, 
the  ascent  to  heaven  and  descent  to  hell  of  divine  Essence,  the  Second  Adam, 
the  Envoy  of  God,  the  Redeemer  of  the  last  days,  the  Son  of  Man,  the  eternal 
city,  and  the  last  judgment.®  In  the  alien  cities  and  the  high  positions  of  strict 
Judaic  and  Persian  priesthoods  the  different  doctrines  might  be  tangibly 
defined  and  argued  about,  but  below  in  the  mass  of  the  people  there  was  prac- 
tically no  specific  religion,  but  a general  Magian  religiousness  which  filled  all 
souls  and  attached  itself  to  glimpses  and  visions  of  every  conceivable  origin. 
The  Last  Day  was  at  hand.  Men  expected  it  and  knew  that  on  that  day  **  He” 
of  whom  all  these  revelations  spoke  would  appear.  Prophets  arose.  More  and 
more  new  communities  and  groups  gathered,  believing  themselves  to  have 
found  either  a better  understanding  of  the  traditional  religion,  or  the  true 
religion  itself.  In  this  time  of  amazing,  ever-increasing  tension,  and  in  the 
very  years  around  Jesus’s  birth-year,  there  arose,  besides  endless  communities 
and  sects,  another  redemption-religion,  the  Manda^an,  as  to  which  we  know 

^ For  instance,  the  Book  of  Naasenes  (P.  Wendiand,  Hellmistisch’fomische  Kultur,  pp.  177,  etscq.)j 
the  “Mithras  Liturgy’'  (ed,  A.  Dietcrich);  the  Hermetic  Poemandcr  (ed.  Reitzenstein),  the  Psalma 
of  Solomon,  the  Gospels  of  Thomas  and  Peter,  the  Pistis-Sophia,  etc.  [Information  as  to  these  will 
be  found  in  the  articles  “Ophites,”  “Mithras,”  “Hermes  Trismegistus,”  “Apocalyptic  Literature, 
“Apocryphal  Literature,”  “Gnosticism,”  in  the  Eno]/,  Brif.,  XI  ed.  — Tr.] 

2 Any  more  than  Dostoyevski’s  Dream  of  a Ridiculous  Person  ” is  so. 

® Our  definitive  ideas  of  this  early  Magian  vision-world  we  owe  to  the  manuscripts  of  Turfan, 
which  have  reached  Berlin  since  1903.  It  was  these  which  at  last  freed  our  knowledge  and,  above  all, 
our  criteria  from  the  deformations  due  to  the  preponderance  of  ’Wcstern-Hellcnistic  material  a 
preponderance  that  had  been  augmented  by  Egyptian  papyrus  finds  — and  radically  transformed  all 
our  existing  views.  Now  at  last  the  pure,  almost  unknown.  East  is  seen  operative  in  all  the  apoca- 
lypses, hymns,  liturgies,  and  books  of  edification  of  the  Persians,  Mandxans,  Manichasans,  and 
countless  other  sects;  and  primitive  Christianity  for  the  first  time  really  takes  its  place  in  the  move- 
ment to  which  it  owes  its  spiritual  origins  (sec  H,  Lfiders,  Sitxmgen  der  Berliner  Akademie, 
and  R.  Reitzenstein,  Das  iranische  Erlosmigsmysterium  (15x1). 


114  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

tiotiiiiig  of  founder  or  origins.  In  spite  of  its  hatred  of  the  Judaism  of  Jerusalem 
and  its  definite  preference  for  the  Persian  idea  of  redemption,  the  Mandxan 
religion  seems  to  have  stood  very  close  to  the  popular  beliefs  of  Syrian  Jewry, 
One  after  another,  pieces  of  its  wonderful  documents  are  becoming  available, 
and  they  consistently  show  us  a ‘‘Him,’’  a Son  of  Man,  a Redeemer  who  is 
sent  down  into  the  depths,  who  himself  must  be  redeemed  and  is  the  goal  of 
man’s  expectations.  In  the  Book  of  John,  the  Father  high  upraised  in  the  House 
of  Fulfilment,  bathed  in  light,  says  to  his  only  begotten  Son:  “My  Son,  be  to 
me  an  ambassador;  go  into  the  world  of  darkness,  where  no  ray  of  light  is.” 
And  the  Son  calls  up  to  him:  “Father,  in  what  have  I sinned  that  thou  hast 
sent  me  into  the  darkness?”  And  finally:  “Without  sin  did  I ascend  and  there 
was  no  sin  and  defect  in  me.”^ 

All  the  characters  of  the  great  prophetic  religions  and  of  the  whole  store  of 
profound  glimpses  and  visions  later  collected  into  apocalypses  are  seen  here  as 
foundations.  Of  Classical  thought  and  feeling  not  a breath  reached  this  Magian 
underworld.  No  doubt  the  beginnings  of  the  new  religion  ate  lost  irrevocably. 
But  historical  figure  of  Maiidasanism  stands  forth  with  startling  distinctness, 
as  tragic  in  his  purpose  and  his  downfall  as  Jesus  himself  — ^John  the  Baptist.^ 
He,  almost  emancipated  from  Judaism,  and  filled  with  the  as  mighty  a hatred  of 
the  Jerusalem  spirit  as  that  of  primitive  Russia  for  Petersburg,  preached  the 
end  of  the  world  and  the  coming  of  the  Barnasha,  the  Son  of  Man,  who  is  no 
longer  the  longed-for  national  Messiah  of  the  Jews,  but  the  bringer  of  the  world- 
conflagration.^  To  him  came  Jesus  and  was  his  disciple.^  He  was  thirty  years 
old  when  the  awakening  came  over  him.  Thenceforth  the  apocalyptic,  and  in 
particular  the  Mandxan,  thought-world  filled  his  whole  being.  The  other 
world  of  historical  actuality  lying  round  him  was  to  him  as  something  sham, 
alien,  void  of  significance.  That  “ He”  would  now  come  and  make  an  end 

^ Lidzbarski,  Das  Johanneshuch  der  Mandaer,  Ch.  LXVI.  Also  W.  Bousset,  KauppohUm  dtf 
Gnosis  (1507)  and  Rcitzcnstcia,  Das  MandMsche  Buch  dtr  Herrn  der  Grosse  (1919),  an  apocalypse  ap- 
proximately contemporary  with  the  oldest  Gospels.  On  the  Messiah  texts,  the  Descent-into-Hcll 
texts,  and  the  Songs  of  the  Dead  see  Lidzbarski,  MandMsche  Liturgien  (1910);  also  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  Cespecially  the  second  and  third  books  of  the  left  Genza)  in  Reitzenstein’s  Das  iranische  Erld- 
sungsm^sSerium  Ce^spccially  pp.  43,  ct  seq.).  [The  Mandsean  religion  survives  to-day  in  the  region 
of  the  Shatt-ei- Arab  and  the  Karun  valley  or  Khuzistan. — Tr.J 

^ See  Rcitzcnstcin,  pp,  1x4,  et  seq.,  and  references  there  quoted. 

® In  the  New  Testament,  of  which  the  final  redaction  lies  entirely  in  the  sphere  of  Wcstera- 
Classical  thought,  the  Mandxan  religion  and  the  sects  belonging  thereto  arc  no  longer  understood, 
and  indeed  everything  Oriental  seems  to  have  dropped  out.  Acts  xviii-xix,  however,  discloses  a 
perceptible  hostility  between  the  then  widespread  John-communities  and  the  Primitive  Christians 
(see  Dibclius  Die  Urchristlkhe  uberliefermgen  von  Johannes  dem  Tdufer'),  The  Mandseans  later  rejected 
Christianity  as  flatly  as  they  had  rejected  Judaism.  Jesus  was  for  them  a false  Messiah.  In  their 
Apocalypse  of  the  Lord  of  Greatness  the  apparition  of  Enosh  was  also  announced. 

* According  to  Rcitzenstein  (JDas  Buch  von  Herrn  der  Grosse)  Jcsxxs  was  condemned  at  Jerusalem  as 
a John-disciple.  According  to  Lidzbarski  (Mand.  Lif.,  x^ijo,  XVI  and  Zimmern  (JLtschr.  d,  D.  Morg. 
Gesellschaft^  192L0,  p.  4x9),  the  expression  “J^sus  the  Nazarene”  or  “Nasorene,”  which  was  later 
by  the  Christian  communities  referred  to  Nazareth  (Matthew  ii,  X3,  with  a doubtful  citation), 
really  indicates  the  membership  in  a Maadasan  Order. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  xi5 

of  this  unreal  reality  was  his  magnificent  certainty,  and  like  his  master  John, 
he  stepped  forth  as  its  herald.  Even  now  we  can  see,  in  the  oldest  Gospels  that 
were  embodied  into  the  New  Testament,  gleams  of  this  period  in  which  he  was, 
in  his  consciousness,  nothing  but  a prophet.^ 

But  there  was  a moment  in  his  life  when  an  inkling,  and  then  high  certainty, 
came  over  him  — “Thou  art  thyself  It!’'  It  was  a secret  that  he  at  first  hardly 
admitted  to  himself,  and  only  later  imparted  to  his  nearest  friends  and  com- 
panions, who  thereafter  shared  with  him,  in  all  stillness,  the  blessed  mission, 
till  finally  they  dared  to  reveal  the  truths  before  all  the  world  by  the  momentous 
journey  to  Jerusalem.  If  there  is  anything  at  all  that  clouds  the  complete  purity 
and  honour  of  his  thought,  it  is  that  doubt  as  to  whether  he  has  deceived  him- 
self which  from  time  to  time  seizes  him,  and  of  which,  later,  his  disciples  told 
quite  frankly.  He  comes  to  his  home.  The  village  crowds  to  him,  recognizes 
the  former  carpenter  who  left  his  work,  is  angered.  The  family  — mother 
and  all  the  brothers  and  sisters  — are  ashamed  of  him  and  would  have  arrested 
him.  And  with  all  these  familiar  eyes  upon  him  he  was  confused  and  felt  the 
magic  power  depart  from  him  (Mark  vi).  In  Gethsemane  doubts  of  his  mis- 
sion ^ mingled  themselves  in  the  terrible  fear  of  coming  things,  and  even  on  the 
cross  men  heard  the  anguished  cry  that  God  had  forsaken  him. 

Even  in  these  last  hours  he  lived  entirely  in  the  form  of  his  own  apocalyptic 
world,  which  alone  was  ever  real  to  him.  What  to  the  Roman  sentries  stand- 
ing below  him  was  reality  was  for  him  an  object  of  helpless  wonder,  an  illusion 
that  might  at  any  moment  without  warning  vanish  into  nothingness.  He 
possessed  the  pure  and  unadulterated  soul  of  the  townless  land.  The  life  of  the 
cities  and  their  spirit  were  to  him  utterly  alien.  Did  he  really  see  the  semi- 
Classical  Jerusalem,  into  which  he  rode  as  the  Son  of  Man,  and  understand 
its  historical  nature?  This  is  what  thrills  us  in  the  last  days  — and  the  collision 
of  facts  with  truths,  of  two  worlds  that  will  never  understand  one  another,  and 
his  entire  incomprehension  of  what  was  happening  about  him. 

So  he  went,  proclaiming  his  message  without  reservation,  through  his 
country.  But  this  country  was  Palestine.  He  was  born  in  the  Classical  Empire 
and  lived  under  the  eyes  of  the  Judaism  of  Jerusalem,  and  when  his  soul,  fresh 
from  the  awful  revelation  of  its  mission,  looked  about,  it  was  confronted  by  the 
actuality  of  the  Roman  State  and  that  of  Pharisaism.  His  repugnance  for  the 
stiff  and  selfish  ideal  of  the  latter,  which  he  shared  with  all  Mandxanism  and 
doubtless  with  the  peasant  Jewry  of  the  wide  East,  is  the  hall-mark  of  all  his 
discourses  from  first  to  last.  It  angered  him  that  this  wilderness  of  cold-hearted 
formulae  was  reputed  to  be  the  only  way  to  salvation.  Still,  thus  far  it  was  only 

^ E.g.,  Mark  vi;  and  then  the  great  change,  Mark  viii,  17,  et  seq.  There  is  no  religion  which 
has  given  us  more  honestly  the  tale  of  its  birth. 

2 Similarly  in  Mark  i/38,  et  seq.,  when  he  arose  in  the  night  and  sought  a lonely  place  in  order 
to  fortify  himself  by  prayer. 


xi6  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

another  kind  of  piety  that  his  conviction  was  asserting  against  Rabbinical  logic. 
Thus  far  it  is  only  the  Law  versus  the  Prophets. 

But  when  Jesus  was  taken  before  Pilate,  then  the  world  of  facts  and  the  world  of 
truths  were  face  to  face  in  immediate  and  imflacable  hostility.  It  is  a scene  appallingly 
distinct  and  overwhelming  in  its  symbolism,  such  as  the  world’s  history  had 
never  before  and  has  never  since  looked  at.  The  discord  that  lies  at  the  root  of 
all  mobile  life  from  its  beginning,  in  virtue  of  its  very  being,  of  its  having  both 
existence  and  awareness,  took  here  the  highest  form  that  can  possibly  be  con- 
ceived of  human  tragedy.  In  the  famous  question  of  the  Roman  Procurator: 
“What  is  truth?”  — the  one  word  that  is  race-pure  in  the  whole  Greek  Testa- 
ment — lies  the  entire  meaning  of  history,  the  exclusive  validity  of  the  deed,  the 
prestige  of  the  State  and  war  and  blood,  the  all-powerfulness  of  success  and  the 
pride  of  eminent  fitness.  Not  indeed  the  mouth,  but  the  silent  feeling  of  Jesus 
answers  this  question  by  that  other  which  is  decisive  in  all  things  of  religion  — 
What  is  actuality?  For  Pilate  actuality  was  all;  for  him  nothing.  Were  it 
anything,  indeed,  pure  religiousness  could  never  stand  up  against  history  and 
the  powers  of  history,  or  sit  in  judgment  on  active  life;  or  if  it  does,  it  ceases  to 
be  religion  and  is  subjected  itself  to  the  spirit  of  history. 

My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  This  is  the  final  word  which  admits  of  no 
gloss  and  on  which  each  must  check  the  course  wherein  birth  and  nature  have 
set  him.  A being  that  makes  use  of  a waking-consciousness,  or  a waking- 
consciousness which  subjects  being  to  itself;  pulsation  or  tension,  blood  or 
intellect,  history  or  nature,  politics  or  religion  ■ — here  it  is  one  or  the  other, 
there  is  no  honest  way  of  compromise.  A statesman  can  be  deeply  religious,  a 
pious  man  can  die  for  his  country  — but  they  must,  both,  know  on  which 
side  they  are  really  standing.  The  born  politician  despises  the  inward  thought- 
processes  of  the  ideologue  and  ethical  philosopher  in  a world  of  fact — ■ and 
rightly.  For  the  believer,  all  ambition  and  succession  of  the  historical  world 
are  sinful  and  without  lasting  value  — ^ he,  too,  is  right.  A ruler  who  wishes 
to  improve  religion  in  the  direction  of  political,  practical  purposes  is  a fool. 
A sociologist-preacher  who  tries  to  bring  truth,  righteousness,  peace,  and 
forgiveness  into  the  world  of  actuality  is  a fool  also.  No  faith  yet  has  altered 
the  world,  and  no  fact  can  ever  rebut  a faith.  There  is  no  bridge  between  direc- 
tional Time  and  timeless  Eternity,  between  the  course  of  history  and  the  existence 
of  a divine  world-order,  in  the  structure  of  which  the  word  “providence” 
or  “dispensation”  denotes  the  form  of  causality.  This  is  the  final  meaning  of  the 
moment  in  which  Jesus  and  Filate  confronted  one  another.  In  the  one  world,  the 
historical,  the  Roman  caused  the  Galilean  to  be  crucified  — that  was  his  Des- 
tiny. In  the  other  world,  Rome  was  cast  for  perdition  and  the  Cross  became 
the  pledge  of  Redemption  — that  was  the  “ will  of  God.”  ^ 

^ The  method  of  the  present  work  is  historical.  It  therefore  recognizes  the  anti-historical  as 
well  as  the  historical  as  a fact.  The  religious  method,  on  the  contrary,  necessarily  looks  upon  it- 
self as  the  true  and  the  opposite  as  false.  This  difference  is  quite  insuperable. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  : xiy 

Religion  is  meuphy sic  and  nothing  else — ''Credo  qtua  ahstirdurn'  — and  this 
jnetaphysic  is  not  the  metaphysic  of  knowledge,  argument,  proof  (which  is 
mere  philosophy  or  learnedness),  but  lived  and  experienced  mtt^L-^hjsic  — that  is, 
the  unthinkable  as  a certainty,  the  supernatural  as  a fact,  life  as  existence  in  a 
world  that  is  non-actual,  but  true.  Jesus  never  lived  one  moment  in  any  other 
world  but  this.  He  was  no  moralizer,  and  to  see  in  moralizing  the  final  aim  of 
religion  is  to  be  ignorant  of  what  religion  is.  Moralizing  is  nineteenth-century 
Enlightenment,  humane  Philistinism.  To  ascribe  social  purposes  to  Jesus  is  a 
blasphemy.  His  occasional  utterances  of  a social  kind,  so  far  as  they  are 
authentic  and  not  merely  attributed  sayings,  tend  merely  to  edification.  They 
contain  nothing  whatever  of  new  doctrine,  and  they  include  proverbs  of  the 
sort  then  in  general  currency.  His  teaching  was  the  proclamation,  nothing  but 
the  proclamation,  of  those  Last  Things  with  whose  images  he  was  constantly 
filled,  the  dawn  of  the  New  Age,  the  advent  of  heavenly  envoys,  the  last  judg- 
ment, a new  heaven  and  a new  earth.^  Any  other  conception  of  religion  was 
never  in  Jesus,  nor  in  any  truly  deep-feeling  period  of  history.  Religion  is,  first  and 
last,  metaphysic,  other-worldliness  Qenseitigkeii),  awareness  in  a world  of  which 
the  evidence  of  the  senses  rnerely  lights  the  foreground.  It  is  life  in  and  with 
the  supersensible.  And  where  the  capacity  for  this  awareness,  or  even  the 
capacity  for  believing  in  its  existence,  is  wanting,  real  religion  is  at  an  end. 
“My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,”  and  only  he  who  can  look  into  the  depths 
that  this  flash  illumines  can  comprehend  the  voices  that  come  out  of  them. 
It  is  the  Late,  city  periods  that,  no  longer  capable  of  seeing  into  depths,  have 
turned  the  remnants  of  religiousness  upon  the  external  world  and  replaced 
religion  by  humanities,  and  metaphysic  by  moralization  and  social  ethics. 

In  Jesus  we  have  the  direct  opposite,  “Give  unto  Cassar  the  things  that  are 
Cassar’s”  means:  “Fit  yourselves  to  the  powers  of  the  fact-world,  be  patient, 
suffer,  and  ask  it  not  whether  they  are  ‘just. V”  What  alone  matters  is  the 
salvation  of  the  soul.  “Consider  the  lilies”  means:  “Give  no  heed  to  riches 
and  poverty,  for  both  fetter  the  soul  to  cares  of  this  world.”  “Man  cannot 
serve  both  God  and  Mammon”  — by  Mammon  is  meant  the  whole  of  actuality. 
It  is  shallow,  and  it  is  cowardly,  to  argue  away  the  grand  significance  of  this 
demand.  Between  working  for  the  increase  of  one’s  own  riches,  and  working 
for  the  social  ease  of  everyone,  he  would  have  felt  no  difference  whatever. 
When  wealth  affrighted  him,  when  the  primitive  community  in  Jerusalem 

1 Hence  Mark  xiii,  taken  from  an  older  document,  is  perhaps  the  purest  example  of  his  usual  daily 
discourse.  Paul  (i  Thess.  iv,  15-17)  quotes  another,  which  is  missing  in  the  Gospels.  With  these, 
we  have  the  priceless  — but,  by  commentators  dominated  by  the  Gospel  tone,  misunderstood  — ■ 
contributions  of  Papias,  who  about  100  was  still  in  a position  to  collect  much  oral  tradition.  The 
little  that  we  have  of  his  work  suffices  amply  to  show  us  the  apocalyptic  character  of  Jesus’s  daily 
discourses.  It  is  Mark  xiii  and  not  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  that  reproduces  the  real  note  of  them. 
But  as  Ms  teaching  became  modified  into  a teaching  of  Him,  this  material  likewise  was  transformed 
and  the  record  of  his  utterances  became  the  narrative  of  his  manifestation.  In  this  one  respect  the 
picture  given  by  the  Gospels  is  inevitably  false. 


zi8  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

which  was  a strict  Order  and  not  a socialist  club  — rejected  ownership,  it  was 
the  most  direct  opposite  of  ‘'social’*  sentiment  that  moved  them.  Their  con- 
viction was,  not  that  the  visible  state  of  things  was  all,  but  that  it  was  nothing: 
that  it  rested  not  on  appreciation  of  comfort  in  this  world,  but  on  unreserved 
contempt  of  it.  Something,  it  is  true,  must  always  exist  to  be  set  against  and  to 
tiuilify  worldly  fortune,  and  so  we  come  back  to  the  contrast  of  Tolstoi  and 
Dostoyevski.  Tolstoi,  the  townsman  and  Westerner,  saw  in  Jesus  only  a social 
reformer,  and  in  his  metaphysical  impotence  — like  the  whole  civilised  West, 
which  can  only  think  about  distributing,  never  renouncing  — elevated  primitive 
Christianity  to  the  rank  of  a social  revolution.  Dostoyevski,  who  was  poor, 
but  in  certain  hours  almost  a saint,  never  thought  about  social  ameliorations  — 
of  what  profit  would  it  have  been  to  a man’s  soul  to  abolish  property? 

VII 

Amongst  Jesus’s  friends  and  disciples,  stunned  as  they  were  by  the  appalling 
outcome  of  the  journey  to  Jerusalem,  there  spread  after  a few  days  the  news  of 
his  resurrection  and  reappearance.  The  impression  of  this  news  on  such  souls 
and  in  such  a time  can  never  be  more  than  partially  echoed  in  the  sensibilities 
of  a Late  mankind.  It  meant  the  actual  fulfilment  of  all  the  Apocalyptic  of  that 
Magian  Springtime  — the  end  of  the  present  aeon  marked  by  the  ascension  of  the 
redeemed  Redeemer,  the  second  Adam,  the  Saoshyant,  Enosh,  Barnasha,  or 
whatever  other  name  man  attached  to  "Him,”  into  the  light-realm  of  the 
Father.  And  therewith  the  foretold  future,  the  new  world-aeon,  "the  King- 
dom of  Heaven,”  became  immediately  present.  They  felt  themselves  at  the 
decisive  point  in  the  history  of  redemption. 

This  certainty  completely  transformed  the  world-outlook  of  the  little 
circles.  "His”  teachings,  as  they  had  flowed  from  his  mild  and  noble  nature 
— his  inner  feeling  of  the  relation  between  God  and  man  and  of  the  high  mean- 
ing of  the  times,  and  were  exhaustively  comprised  in  and  defined  by  the  word 
"love’*  — fell  into  the  background,  and  their  place  was  taken  by  the  teaching 
of  Him.  As  the  Arisen  he  became  for  his  disciples  a new  figure,  in  and  of  the 
Apocalyptic,  and  (what  was  more)  its  most  important  and  final  figure.  But 
therewith  their  image  of  the  future  took  form  as  an  image  of  memory.  Now, 
this  was  something  of  quite  decisive  importance,  unheard-of  in  the  world  of 
Magian  thought  — the  transference  of  an  actuality,  lived  and  experienced,  on 
to  the  plane  of  the  high  story  itself.  The  Jews  (amongst  them  the  young  Paul) 
and  the  Mandasans  (amongst  them  the  disciples  of  John  the  Baptist)  fought 
against  it  with  passion  and  made  of  Jesus  a "False  Messiah”  such  as  had  been 
spoken  of  in  the  earliest  Persian  texts. ^ For  them  "He”  was  still  to  come  from 
afar;  for  the  little  community  "He”  had  already  been  — had  they  not  seen 
him  and  lived  with  him?  We  have  to  enter  into  this  conception  unreservedly 
^ Jesus  himself  was  aware  of  this  (Matt,  xxiv,  5,11), 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  xi9 

if  we  are  to  appreciate  the  enormous  superiority  it  had  in  those  times.  Instead 
of  an  uncertain  glimpse  into  the  distance/  a compelling  present;  instead  of 
fearful  waiting  for  a liberating  certainty,  instead  of  a saga,  a lived  and  shared 
human  destiny — truly  they  were  “glad  tidings”  that  were  proclaimed. 

But  to  whom?  Even  in  the  first  days  the  question  arose  which  decided  the 
whole  Destiny  of  the  new  revelation.  Jesus  and  his  friends  were  Jews  by  birth, 
but  they  did  not  belong  to  the  land  of  Judea.  Here  in  Jerusalem  men  looked 
for  the  Messiah  of  their  old  sacred  books,  a Messiah  who  was  to  appear  for 
the  “Jewish  people,”  in  the  old  tribal  sense,  and  only  for  them.  But  all  the 
rest  of  the  Aramsean  world  waited  upon  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the  Redeemer 
and  Son  of  Man,  the  figure  of  all  apocalyptic  literature,  whether  written  out  in 
Jewish,  Persian,  Chaldean,  or  Mandasan  terms. ^ In  the  one  view  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Jesus  were  merely  local  events;  in  the  other  they  betokened  a 
world-change.  For,  while  everywhere  else  the  Jews  were  a Magian  nation 
without  home  or  unity  of  birth,  Jerusalem  held  firmly  to  the  tribal  idea.  The 
conflict  was  not  one  between  “preaching  to  the  Jews”  and  “preaching  to  the 
Gentiles”  — it  went  far  deeper.  The  word  “mission”  had  essentially  here  a 
twofold  meaning.  In  the  Judaic  view  there  was  essentially  no  need  for  re- 
cruiting — quite  the  reverse,  as  it  was  a contradiction  to  the  Messiah-idea. 
The  words  “tribe”  and  “mission”  are  reciprocally  exclusive.  The  members 
of  the  Chosen  People,  and  in  particular  the  priesthood,  had  merely  to  convince 
themselves  th.2,t  their  longing  was  now  fulfilled.  But  to  the  Magian  nation, 
based  on  consensus  or  community  of  feeling,  what  the  Resurrection  conveyed  was 
a full  and  definitive  truth,  and  consensus  in  the  matter  of  this  truth  gave  the 
principle  of  the  true  nation,  which  must  necessarily  expand  till  it  had  taken  in  all 
older  and  conceptually  incomplete  principles.  “ A Shepherd  and  his  sheep” 
was  the  formula  of  the  new  world-nation.  The  nation  of  the  Redeemer  was 
identical  with  mankind.  When,  therefore,  we  survey  the  early  history  of 
this  Culture,  we  see  that  the  controversy  in  the  Apostles’  Council  ® had  been 
already  decided,  five  hundred  years  before,  by  facts.  Post-exilic  Jewry  (with 
the  sole  exception  of  self-contained  Judea)  had,  like  the  Persians,  Chaldeans, 
and  others,  recruited  widely  amongst  the  heathen,  from  Turkestan  to  inner 
Africa,  regardless  of  home  and  origin.  As  to  this  there  is  now  no  controversy. 
It  never  at  any  time  entered  the  heads  of  this  community  to  be  anything  but 

^ Made  more  uncertain  perhaps  by  the  failure  of  previous  prophecies  that  had  been  so  confidently 
dated  — e.g.,  Jeremiah  xxv,  ii;  xxiv,  5-6;  reinterpreted  in  Daniel  vii,  ix;  i Enoch  Ixxxiii-xc;  and 
again  to  be  reinterpreted  in  % Baruch  xxxvi-xl  and  4 Ezra  x-xii-  — Tr. 

^ The  designation  ** Messiah  (Christ)”  was  old-Jewish,  those  of  “Lord”  (Kvpt.6s,  divus')  and 
“Saviour”  (jtcottjp,  Asklefios)  were  cast-Aramaan  in  origin.  In  the  course  of  the  pscudomorphosis 
“Christ”  became  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  “Saviour”  the  title;  but  already  “Lord”  and  “Saviour” 
were  titles  current  in  the  Hellenistic  Emperor-  worship;  and  in  this  was  implicit  the  whole  destiny 
of  westward-looking  Christianity  (compare  here  Rcitzcnstcin,  Das  iranische  ErldsmgsmysterimM^  p. 
I3X,  note). 

® Acts  xv;  Gal- iL 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

^ already  the  result  of  a national  existence  in  Ais- 

wh..it«Jl7was.  tS,i.e„s-*hich  were  » carefully 

fw<«.  Ir.  otter  * , he  right  ioterFetation,  the  Halakha,  was 

preserved  treasure,  and  o apocalyptic  literature  was  written 

aTl  Srrr.o  hf:.Lea:^ahd  i..e^etea  so  that  it 

for  they  established  themse  simple  folk  — amongst  them  his  broth- 

ers,  who  erstwhile  Judaic  tradition  was  even  stronger 

in  her  executed  Son  P convincing  the  Jews  they  failed 

C^hS^fet  r^eu  P^haris^s  ca„o  “iS 

:rpin"ay"--"^^ 

selves  ^(jrSis^^t^ ® was  to  fa!  into  oblivion  when,  as  very 

'^h  SeL?*?whole  world  of  Magian  thought  and  feeling  responded  to 
soon  happened,  the  who  a the  later  disciples  of  Jesus  were  many 

the  new  apocalyptic  wholly  free  from  the  Pharisaic 

who  were  definitely  a p ^ y_  • j settled  the  mission  question.  Not 

spirit.  Long  before  Paul,  t ey  ,i  presently  they  had  assembled, 

t!  preach,  for  wlfich  the  figure  of 

everywhere  from  | ^esentation,  merged  with  the  mass  of  prior  visions.* 

Jesus,  m every  P ^^^^^en  mission  to  the  heathen  and  mission 

Out  of  this,  a new  disco  , important  than  the  conflict  between  Judea 

to  the  Jews,  and  this  wa  i jj-j  fesus  had  lived  in  Galilee.  Was  his 

„d  ,h.  world  ou  .rs.es  already  d«ded^  ^e»^  tad  ^ 

wtltrs.SrltiMaey  with  d.e  Persia,  or  with  dre  Sy.ae.ie 

Cl.ad.,botli  <^“'%ad°”°SrLr  great  persom.li.y  i.  the 

1 Acts  i,  14;  cf.  Mark  vi.  ^ of  this  conception.  His  is  the  only  Gospel 

2 As  against  Lnke,  Matt  f ^ ^ i^^ienotes  the  traejews/in  contradistinction  to  the  a as^^^ 

in  which  the  word  Ecclesza  ^^use  , , - j any  more  than  Isaiah  was  a mission- 

'frJir  Xhc  presalpdons  of  Ma«. 

iucornpadb^^^^^^^  SSces  an^  rbcEIkadres  (rbe  la«=r 

» I.  fell  apart  later  ^ P-  ^54)-  the  at- 

having  a strange  sacred  book,  the  bixai,  sec  ^ ^ 

tides  ■•Ebionites”  and  Sabms  m > ^ Apostles  and  in  all  Paul’s  Epistles,  and  indeed 
* Such  sects  were  att^ked  m the  philosophy  which  did  not  give  rise  to 

,tee  w„  todeed  Jl  of  d..  pLioo  ..or,  becomiog.  oot  rta  oudew 


Zll 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES 

As  a young  rabbi  from  the  West,  and  a pupil  of  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the 
Tannaim,  he  had  persecuted  the  Christians  qua  Jewish  sectaries.  Then,  after 
an  awakening  of  the  sort  that  often  happened  in  those  days,  he  turned  to  the 
numerous  small  cult-communities  of  the  West  and  forged  out  of  them  a Church 
oi  his  modelling:  so  that  thenceforward,  the  Pagan  and  the  Christian  cult- 
Churches  evolved  in  parallel,  and  with  constant  reciprocal  action,  up  to  lam- 
blichus  and  Athanasius  (about  a. d.  330).  In  the  presence  of  this  great  ideal, 
Paul  had  for  the  Jesus-communities  of  Jerusalem  a scarcely  veiled  contempt. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  New  Testament  more  express  and  exact  than  the  be- 
ginning of  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians;  his  activity  is  a self-assumed  task; 
he  has  taught  how  it  pleased  him  and  he  has  built  how  it  pleased  him.  Finally, 
after  fourteen  years,  he  goes  to  Jerusalem  in  order,  by  force  of  his  superior 
mentality,  his  success,  and  his  effective  independence  of  the  old  comrades  of 
Jesus,  to  compel  them  there  to  agree  that  his,  PauFs,  creation  contained  the 
true  doctrine.  Peter  and  his  people,  alien  to  actualities,  failed  to  seize  and 
appreciate  the  far-reaching  significance  of  the  discussion.  And  from  that 
moment  the  primitive  community  was  superfluous. 

Paul  was  a rabbi  in  intellect  and  an  apocalyptic  in  feeling.  He  recognized 
Judaism,  but  as  a peliminary  And  thus  there  came  to  be  two 

Magian  religions  with  the  same  Scriptures  (namely,  the  Old  Testament),  but  a 
double  Halakha,  the  one  setting  towards  the  Talmud  — developed  by  the 
Tannaim  at  Jerusalem  from  300  b.c.  onwards  — and  the  other,  founded  by 
Paul  and  completed  by  the  Fathers,  in  the  direction  of  the  Gospel.  But,  further, 
Paul  drew  together  the  whole  fullness  of  Apocalypse  and  salvation-yearning 
then  circulating  in  these  fields  ^ into  a sdlYziion-certainty ^ the  certainty  im- 
mediately revealed  to  him  and  to  him  alone  near  Damascus.  “ Jesus  is  the  Rs- 
deemer  and  Paul  is  his  PropheP*  — this  is  the  whole  content  of  his  message. 
The  analogy  with  Mohammed  could  scarcely  be  closer.  They  differed  neither 
in  the  nature  of  the  awakening,  nor  in  prophetic  self-assuredness,  nor  in  the 
consequent  assertion  of  sole  authority  and  unconditional  truth  for  their  re- 
spective expositions. 

With  Paul,  urban  man  and  his  “intelligence’*  come  on  the  scene.  The 
others,  though  they  might  know  Jerusalem  or  Antioch,  never  grasped  the 
essence  of  these  cities.  They  lived  soil-bound,  rural,  wholly  soul  and  feeling. 
But  now  there  appeared  a spirit  that  had  grown  up  in  the  great  cities  of  Classical 
cast,  that  could  only  live  in  cities,  that  neither  understood  nor  respected  the 
peasant’s  countryside.  An  understanding  was  possible  with  Philo,  but  with 

^ Of  this  he  was  fully  aware.  Many  of  his  deepest  intuitions  ate  unimaginable  without  Persian 
and  Mandasan  influences  (e.g.,  Romans  vii,  x Corinthians  xv,  z6;  Ephesians  v,  6,  et  seq,, 

with  a quotation  of  Persian  origin.  Sec  Rcitzenstcin,  Das  iran,  ErlSs.-^Myst.,  pp.  6,  133,  ct  scq.). 
But  this  docs  not  prove  familiarity  with  Persian-Mandaian  literature.  The  stories  were  spread  in 
these  days  as  sagas  and  folk-tales  were  amongst  us.  One  heard  about  them  in  childhood  as  things 
of  daily  hearsay,  but  without  being  in  the  least  aware  of  how  deeply  one  was  under  their  spell. 


m the  decline  of  THE  WEST  • 

Peter  never.  Paul  was  the  first  by  whom  the  Resurrection-experience  was 
seen  as  a pobkmj  the  ecstatic  awe  of  the  young  countryman  changed  in  his  brain 
into  a conflict  of  spiritual  principles.  For  what  a contrast!  — the  struggle  of 
Gethsemane,  and  the  hour  of  Damascus:  Child  and  Man,  soul-anguish  and 
intellectual  decision,  self-devotion  to  death  and  resolve  to  change  sides  1 Paul 
had  begun  by  seeing  in  the  new  Jewish  sect  a danger  to  the  Pharisaism  of 
Jerusalem;  now,  suddenly,  he  comprehended  that  the  Nazarenes  “ were  right” 
— a phrase  that  is  inconceivable  on  the  lips  of  Jesus  — and  took  up  their  cause 
against  Judaism,  thereby  setting  up  as  an  intellectual  quantitj  that  which  had 
previously  consisted  in  the  knowledge  of  an  experience.  An  intellectual 
quantity  — but  in  making  his  cause  into  this  he  unwittingly  drove  it  close  to 
the  other  intellectual  powers,  the  cities  of  the  West.  In  the  ambiance  of  pure 
Apocalyptic  there  is  no  “intellect,”  For  the  old  comrades  it  was  simply  not 
possible  to  understand  him  in  the  least  — and  mournfully  and  doubtfully 
they  must  have  looked  at  him  while  he  was  addressing  them.  Their  living 
image  of  Jesus  (whom  Paul  had  never  seen)  paled  in  this  bright,  hard  light  of 
concepts  and  propositions.  Thenceforward  the  holy  memory  faded  into  a 
Scholastic  system.  But  Paul  had  a perfectly  exact  feeling  for  the  true  home  of 
his  ideas.  His  missionary  journeys  were  all  directed  westward,  and  the  East  he 
ignored.  He  never  left  the  domain  of  the  Classical  city.  Why  did  he  go  to  Rome, 
to  Corinth,  and  not  to  Edessa  of  Ctesiphon?  And  why  was  it  that  he  worked 
only  in  the  cities,  and  never  from  village  to  village! 

That  things  developed  thus  was  due  to  Paul  alone.  In  the  face  of  his  practical 
energy  the  feelings  of  all  the  rest  counted  for  nothing,  and  so  the  young  Church 
took  the  urban  and  Western  tendency  decisively,  so  decisively  that  later  it  could 
describe  the  remaining  heathen  as  **paganif'  country-folk.  Thus  arose  an 
immense  danger  that  only  youth  and  vernal  force  enabled  the  growing  Church 
to  repel;  the  fellah-world  of  the  Classical  cities  grasped  at  it  with  both  hands, 
and  the  marks  of  that  grasp  are  visible  to-day.  But  — how  remote  already 
from  the  essence  of  Jesus,  whose  entire  life  had  been  bound  to  country  and  the 
country-folk!  The  Pseudomorphosis  in  which  he  was  born  he  had  simply  not 
noticed;  his  soul  contained  not  the  smallest  trace  of  its  influence  — and  now, 
a generation  after  him,  probably  within  the  lifetime  of  his  mother,  that  which 
had  grown  up  out  of  his  death  had  already  become  a centre  of  formative  pur- 
pose for  that  Pseudomorphosis.  The  Classical  City  was  soon  the  only  theatre 
of  ritual  and  dogmatic  evolution.  Eastward  the  community  extended  only  fur- 
tively and  unobtrusively.^  About  a.d.  ioo  there  were  already  Christians  beyond 
the  Tigris,  but  as  far  as  the  development  of  the  Church  was  concerned  they  and 
their  beliefs  might  almost  have  been  non-existent. 

^ The  carlf  missionary  effort  in  the  East  has  scarcely  been  investigated  and  is  still  very  difficult 
to  establish  in  detail.  Sachau,  Chronik  rm  Arhla  and  **Die  Ajushreitung  der  Christmtums  in 

Asim”  inMh.  Pr.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.  (1^19);  Harnack,  d^stmund  Aushreitung  des  Christmtums,  II,  117, 
Ct  scq. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  2x3 

It  was  a second  creation,  then,  that  came  out  of  PauTs  immediate  entourage, 
and  it  was  this  creation  that,  essentially,  defined  the  form  of  the  new  Church. 
The  personality  and  the  story  of  Jesus  cried  aloud  to  be  put  into  poetic  form, 
and  yet  it  is  due  to  one  man  alone,  Mark,  that  Gospels  came  into  existence  at 
all.^  What  Paul  and  Mark  had  before  them  was  a firm  tradition  in  the  com- 
munity, the  “Gospel,*’  a continued  and  propagated  hearsay,  supported  by 
formless  and  insignificant  notes  in  Aramaic  and  Greek,  but  in  no  way  set  out. 
In  any  case,  of  course,  serious  documents  would  have  come  into  existence  some 
time  or  another,  but  their  natural  form  as  products  of  the  spirit  of  those  who 
had  lived  with  Jesus  (and  of  the  spirit  of  the  East  generally)  would  have  been  a 
canonical  collection  of  his  sayings,  amplified,  conclusively  defined,  and  provided 
with  an  exegesis  by  the  Councils  and  pivoting  upon  the  Second  Advent.  But 
any  tentatives  in  this  direction  were  completely  broken  off  by  the  Gospel  of 
Mark,  which  was  written  down  about  a.d.  65,  at  the  same  time  as  the  last 
Pauline  Epistles,  and,  like  them,  in  Greek.  The  writer  had  no  suspicion,  per- 
haps, of  the  significance  of  his  little  work,  but  it  made  him  one  of  the  supremely 
important  personalities  not  only  of  Christianity,  but  of  the  Arabian  Culture 
generally.  All  older  attempts  vanished,  leaving  writings  in  Gospel-form  as  the 
sole  sources  concerning  Jesus.  (So  much  so  that  Evangelium,''  from  signifying 
the  content  of  glad  tidings,  came  to  mean  the  form  itself.)  The  work  was  the 
outcome  of  the  wishes  of  Pauline,  literate,  circles  that  had  never  heard  any  one 
of  Jesus’s  companions  discourse  about  him.  It  is  an  apocalyptic  life-picture  from  a 
distance;  lived  experience  is  replaced  by  narrative,  and  narrative  so  plain  and 
straightforward  that  the  apocalyptic  tendency  passes  quite  unperceived.® 
And  yet  Apocalyptic  is  its  condition  precedent.  It  is  not  the  words  of  Jesus,  but 
the  doctrine  of  Jesus  in  the  Pauline  form,  that  constitutes  the  substance  of 
Mark.  The  first  Christian  book  emanates  from  the  Pauline  creation.  But  very 
soon  the  latter  itself  becomes  unthinkable  without  the  book  and  its  successors. 

For  presently  there  arose  something  which  Paul,  the  born  schoolman, 
had  never  intended,  but  which  nevertheless  had  been  made  inevitable  by  the 
tendency  of  his  work — ■ the  cult-church  of  Christian  nationality.  While  the 
Syncretic  creed-community,  in  proportion  as  it  attained  to  consciousness  of 
itself,  drew  the  innumerable  old  city-cults  and  the  new  Magian  together  and 
by  means  of  a supreme  cult  endowed  the  structure  with  henotheistic  form,  the 
Jesus-cult  of  the  oldest  Western  communities  was  so  long  dissected  and  enriched 
that  it  also  came  to  consist  of  just  such  another  mass  of  cults.^  Around  the 

^ The  researchers  who  argue  with  such  over-lcarncdncss  about  a proto-Mark,  Source  Q,  the 
“Twelve ’’-source,  and  so  on,  overlook  the  essential  novelty  of  Mark,  which  is  the  first '*BooK'  of 
Christendom^  plan-uniform  and  entire.  Work  of  this  sort  is  never  the  natural  product  of  an  evolution, 
but  the  merit  of  an  individual  man,  and  it  marks,  here  if  anywhere,  a historical  turning-point. 

^ Mark  is  generally  the  Gospel;  after  him  the  partisan  writings  (Matthew,  Luke)  begin;  the 
tone  of  narrative  passes  into  that  of  legend  and  ends,  beyond  the  Hebrew  and  John  gospels,  in  jesus- 
romances  like  the  gospels  of  Peter  and  James. 

® If  the  word  “catholic”  be  used  in  its  oldest  sense  ad Smyrn,,  8)  — namely,  to  signify 


7JL4  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

bitth  of  Jesus,  of  which  the  Disciples  knew  nothing,  grew  up  a story  of  his 
childhood.  In  the  Mark  Gospel  it  has  not  yet  come  into  existence.  Already 
in  the  old  Persian  apocalyptic,  indeed,  the  Saoshyant  as  Saviour  of  the  Last 
Day  was  said  to  be  born  of  a virgin.  But  the  new  western  myth  was  of  quite 
other  significance  and  had  incalculable  consequences.  For  within  the  Pseudo- 
morphosis-region  there  arose  presently  beside  Jesus  a figure  to  which  he  was 
Son,  which  transcended  his  figure  — that  of  the  Mother  of  God.  She,  like  her 
Son,  was  a simple  human  destiny  of  such  arresting  and  attractive  force  that  she 
towered  above  all  the  hundred  and  one  Virgins  and  Mothers  of  Syncretism  — 
Isis,  Tanit,  Cybele,  Demeter  — and  all  the  mysteries  of  birth  and  pain,  and 
finally  drew  them  into  herself.  For  Irenasus  she  is  the  Eve  of  a new  mankind. 
Origen  champions  her  continued  virginity.  By  giving  birth  to  Redeemer-God 
it  is  she  really  who  has  redeemed  the  world.  Mary  the  “Theotokos*’  (she 
who  bare  God)  was  the  great  stumbling-block  for  the  Christians  outside  the 
Classical  frontier,  and  it  was  the  doctrinal  developments  of  this  idea  that  led 
Monophysites  and  Nestorians  to  break  away  and  re-establish  the  pure  Jesus- 
religion.^  But  the  Faustian  Culture,  again,  when  it  awoke  and  needed  a symbol 
whereby  to  express  its  primary  feeling  for  Infinity  in  time  and  to  manifest  its 
sense  of  the  succession  of  generations,  set  up  the  ''Mater  Dolorosa''  and  not  the 
suffering  Kedeemer  as  the  pivot  of  the  German-Catholic  Christianity  of  the  Gothic 
age;  and  for  whole  centuries  of  bright  fruitful  inwardness  this  woman-figure 
was  the  very  synthesis  of  Faustian  world-feeling  and  the  object  of  all  art, 
poetry,  and  piety.  Even  to-day  in  the  ritual  and  the  prayers  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church,  and  above  all  in  the  thoughts  of  its  people,  Jesus  takes  second 
place  after  the  Madonna.^ 

Along  with  the  Mary-cult  there  arose  the  innumerable  cults  of  the  saints, 
which  certainly  exceeded  in  number  those  of  the  antique  place-gods;  when  the 
Pagan  Church  finally  expired,  the  Christian  had  been  able  to  absorb  the  whole 
store  of  local  cults  in  the  form  of  the  veneration  of  saints. 

Paul  and  Mark  were  decisive  in  yet  another  matter  of  inestimably  wide 
import.  It  was  a result  of  Paul’s  mission  that,  contrary  to  all  the  initial  proba- 
bilities, Greek  became  the  language  of  the  Church  and  — following  the  lead 
of  the  first  Gospel  — of  a sacred  Greek  literature.  Let  the  reader  consider  what 
this  meant,  in  one  way  and  another.  The  Jesus  Church  was  artificially  separated 
from  its  spiritual  origins  and  attached  to  an  alien  and  scholarly  element.  Touch 
with  the  folk-spirit  of  the  Aramaean  motherland  was  lost.  Thenceforward 
both  the  cult-Churchcs  possessed  the  same  language,  the  same  conceptual 

the  sMm  of  the  cuit-coffimanities,  both  the  Churches  were  Catholic.  In  the  East  the  word  had  no 
meaning.  The  Nestorian  Church  was  no  more  a sum  than  was  the  Persian:  it  was  a Magian  unit. 

^ A brief  survey  of  the  Mary  doctrine  is  given  in  article  “Mary,”E?^0?.  Brit.,  XI  ed.  The  sym- 
bolism involved  in  the  details  of  the  story  of  Mary,  as  told  in  writing  and  in  art,  is  very  fully  gone 
into  in  Yrjo  Him,  The  Sacred  Shrine,  — Tr. 

2 Ed.  Meyer,  Urspung  und  Anfmge  des  Christemums  Gs'^DiVT^  77» 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  1x5 

traditions,  the  same  book-literature  from  the  same  schools.  The  far  less  so- 
phisticated Aramaic  literatures  of  the  East  — the  truly  Magian,  written  and 
thought  in  the  language  of  Jesus  and  his  companions  — were  cut  off  from  co- 
operating in  the  life  of  the  Church.  They  could  not  be  read,  they  dropped  out 
of  sight,  and  finally  they  were  forgotten  altogether.  After  ail,  notwithstanding 
that  the  Persian  Scriptures  were  set  down  in  Avestan  and  the  Jewish  in  Hebrew, 
the  language  of  their  authors  and  exegetes;  the  language  of  the  whole  Apoc- 
alyptic from  which  the  teachings  of  Jesus,  and  secondarily  the  teachings 
about  Jesus,  sprang;  the  language,  lastly,  of  the  scholars  of  all  the  Mesopo- 
tamian universities  — was  Aramaic.  All  this  vanished  from  the  field  of^view, 
to  be  replaced  by  Plato  and  Aristotle,  both  of  whom  were  taken  up,  worked 
upon  in  common,  and  misunderstood  in  common  by  the  Schoolmen  of  the  two 
cult-Churches. 

A final  step  in  this  direction  was  attempted  by  a man  who  was  the  equal 
of  Paul  in  organising  talent  and  greatly  his  superior  in  intellectual  creativeness, 
but  who  was  inferior  to  him  in  the  feeling  for  possibilities  and  actualities,  and 
consequently  failed  to  achieve  his  grandly  conceived  schemes  — - Marcion.^ 
He  saw  in  Paul's  creation  and  its  consequences  only  the  basis  on  which  to 
found  the  true  religion  of  salvation.  He  was  sensible  of  the  absurdity  of  two 
religions  that  were  unreservedly  at  war  with  one  another  possessing  the  same 
Holy  Writ  — namely,  the  Jewish  canon.  To  us  to-day  it  seems  almost  incon- 
ceivable that  this  should  have  been,  but  in  fact  it  was  so,  for  a century  — but 
we  have  to  remember  what  a sacred  text  meant  in  every  kind  of  Magian  re- 
ligiousness. In  these  texts  Marcion  saw  the  real  “conspiracy  against  the 
truth**  and  the  most  urgent  danger  for  the  doctrines  intended  by  Jesus  and, 
in  his  view,  not  yet  actualized.  Paul  the  prophet  had  declared  the  Old  Testa- 
ment as  fulfilled  and  concluded  — Marcion  the  founder  pronounced  it  defeated 
and  cancelled.  He  strove  to  cut  out  everything  Jewish,  down  to  the  last  detail. 
From  end  to  end  he  was  fighting  nothing  but  Judaism.  Like  every  true  founder, 
like  every  religiously  creative  period,  like  Zarathustra,  the  prophets  of  Israel, 
like  the  Homeric  Greeks,  and  like  the  Germans  converted  to  Christianity, 
he  transformed  the  old  gods  into  defeated  powers.^  Jehovah  as  the  Creator-God, 
the  Demiurge,  is  the  “Just**  and  therefore  the  Evil:  Jesus  as  the  incarnation  of  the 
Saviour-God  in  this  evil  creation  is  the  “alien**  — that  is,  the  good  Principle.® 
The  foundation  of  Magian,  and  in  particular  Persian,  feeling  is  perfectly  un- 
mistakable here.  Marcion  came  from  Sinope,  the  old  capital  of  that  Mithra- 

^ C.  85-155.  See  the  recent  work  of  Harnack,  Marchn:  Das  Evangelism  vomfremden  Got:  (1911). 
[Hamack's  article  “Marcion”  in  Ency.  XI  ed.,:is  dated  1910.  — Tf.] 

2 Harnack,  op.  cit.,  pp.  136,  et  seq.;  N.  Bonwetsch,  Grundr.  d.  Dogmengesch.  (1919),  p.  45,  et 
scq.  ■ ■ ' ■ ^ ■ . 

® This  is  one  of  the  profoundest  ideas  in  all  religions  history,  and  one  that  must  for  ever  remain 
inaccessible  to  the  pious  average  man.  Marcion’s  identification  of  the  “J«st”  with  the  Evil  enables 
him  in  this  sense  to  oppose  the  Law  of  the  Old  Testament  to  the  Evangel  of  the  New. 


izS  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

datic  Empire  whose  religion  is  indicated  in  the  very  name  of  its  kings.  Here 
of  old,  too,  the  Mithras  cult  had  originated. 

But  to  the  new  doctrine  properly  belonged  new  Scriptures.  The  “Law  and 
Prophets”  which  had  hitherto  been  canonical  for  the  whole  of  Christendom 
was  the  jBiife  the  Jewish  God,  and  in  fact  it  had  just  been  given  final  shape  as 
such  by  the  Synedrion  at  Jabna.  Thus,  it  was  a Devil’s  book  that  the  Christian 
had  in  his  hands,  and  Marcion,  therefore,  now  set  up  against  it  the  Bible  of  the 
Redeemer-God  — likewise  an  assemblage  and  ordering  of  writings  that  had 
hitherto  been  current  in  the  community  ^ as  simple  edification-books  without 
canonical  claims.  In  place  of  the  Torah  he  puts  the  — one  and  true  Gospel, 
which  he  builds  up  uniformly  out  of  various  separate,  and,  in  his  view,  cor- 
rupted and  falsified.  Gospels.  In  place  of  the  Israelite  prophets  he  sets  up  the 
Epistles  of  the  one  prophet  of  Jesus,  who  was  Paul. 

Thus  Marcion  became  the  real  creator  of  the  New  Testament.  But  for  that 
reason  it  is  impossible  to  ignore  the  mysterious  personage,  closely  related  to 
him,  who  not  long  before  had  written  the  Gospel  “according  to  John.”  The 
intention  of  this  writer  was  neither  to  amplify  nor  to  supersede  the  Gospels 
proper;  what  he  did  — ■ and,  unlike  Mark,  consciously  did  — was  to  create 
something  quite  new,  the  first  sacred  book  of  Christianity,  the  Koran  of  the  new 
religion.^  The  book  proves  that  this  religion  was  already  conceived  of  as  some- 
thing complete  and  enduring.  The  idea  of  the  immediately  impending  end  of 
the  world,  with  which  Jesus  was  filled  through  and  through  and  which  even 
Paul  and  Mark  in  a measure  shared,  lies  far  behind  “John”  and  Marcion. 
Apocalyptic  is  at  an  end,  and  Mysticism  is  beginning.  Their  content  is  not 
the  teaching  of  Jesus,  nor  even  the  Pauline  teaching  about  Jesus,  but  the  enigma 
of  the  universe,  the  World-Cavern.  There  is  here  no  question  of  a Gospel; 
not  the  figure  of  the  Redeemer,  but  the  principle  of  the  Logos,  is  the  meaning 
and  the  means  of  happening.  The  childhood  story  is  rejected  again;  a god  is 
not  “born,”  he  is  “there,”  and  wanders  in  human  form  over  the  earth.  And 
this  god  is  a Trinity  ’ — God,  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  Word  of  God.  This  sacred 
book  of  earliest  Christianity  contains,  for  the  first  time,  the  Magian  problem 
of  “ Substance,”  which  dominated  the  following  centuries  of  the  exclusion  of 
everything  else  and  finally  led  to  the  religion’s  splitting  up  into  three  churches. 
And — what  is  significant  in  more  respects  than  one  — the  solution  of  that 
problem  to  which  “John”  stands  closest  is  that  which  the  Nestorian  East 
stood  for  as  the  true  one.  It  is,  in  virtue  of  the  Logos  idea  (Greek  though 

^ About  A.D.  150.  Sec  Harnack,  op.  cit.,  pp.  jz,  ct  seq. 

2 For  the  notions  of  Koran  and  Logos,  sec  below.  Again  as  in  the  case  of  Mark,  the  really 
important  question  is,  not  what  the  material  before  him  was,  but  how  this  entirely  novel  idea 
for  such  a book,  which  anticipated  and  indeed  made  possible  Marcion’s  plan  for  a Christian  Bible, 
could  arise.  The  book  presupposes  a great  spiritual  movement  (in  eastern  Asia  Minor?)  that  knew 
scarcely  anything  of  Jewish  Christianity  and  was  yet  remote  from  the  Pauline,  westerly  thought- 
world.  But  of  the  region  and  type  of  this  movement  we  know  nothing  whatever. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  ,117 

the  word  happens  to  be)  the  “easternmost*'  of  the  Gospels,  and  presents  Jesus, 
emphatically  not  as  the  bringer  of  the  final  and  total  revelation,  but  as  the 
second  envoy,  who  is  to  be  followed  by  a third  (the  Comforter,  Paraclete,  of 
John  xiv,  16,  x6;  xv,  2.6).  This  is  the  astounding  doctrine  that  Jesus  him- 
self proclaims,  and  the  decisive  note  of  this  enigmatic  book.  Here  is  unveiled, 
quite  suddenly,  the  faith  of  the  Magian  East.  If  the  Logos  does  not  go,  the 
Paraclete  ^ cannot  come  (John  xvi,  7),  but  between  them  lies  the  last  iEon, 
the  rule  of  Ahriman  (xiv,  30).  The  Church  of  the  Pseudomorphosis,  ruled  by 
Pauline  intellect,  fought  long  against  the  John  Gospel  and  gave  it  recognition 
only  when  the  offensive,  darkly  hinted  doctrine  had  been  covered  over  by  a 
Pauline  interpretation.  The  real  state  of  affairs  is  disclosed  in  the  Montanist 
movement  (Asia  Minor,  160)  which  harked  back  to  oral  tradition  and  pro- 
claimed in  Montanus  the  manifested  Paraclete  and  the  end  of  the  world.  Its 
popularity  was  immense.  Tertullian  went  over  to  it  at  Carthage  in  loj.  About 
X45  Mani,^  who  was  intimately  in  touch  with  the  currents  of  Eastern  Chris- 
tianity,® cast  out  the  Pauline,  human  Jesus  as  a demon  and  confessed  the  Johan- 
nine  Logos  as  the  true  Jesus,  but  announced  himself  as  the  Paraclete  of  the 
fourth  Gospel.  In  Carthage,  Augustine  became  a Manichasan,  and  it  is  a 
highly  suggestive  fact  that  both  movements  finally  fused  with  Marcionism. 

To  return  to  Marcion  himself,  it  was  he  who  carried  through  the  idea  of 
“John*’  and  created  a Christian  Bible.  And  then,  verging  on  old  age,  when  the 
communities  of  the  extreme  west  recoiled  from  him  in  horror,^  he  set  out  to 
build  the  masterly  structure  of  his  own  Redeemer-Church.®  From  156  to  190  this 
was  a power,  and  it  was  only  in  the  following  century  that  the  older  Church 
succeeded  in  degrading  the  Marcionites  to  the  rank  of  heretics.  Even  so,  in  the 
broad  East  and  as  far  out  as  Turkestan,  it  was  still  important  at  a much  later 
date,  and  it  ended,  in  a way  deeply  significant  of  its  essential  feeling,  by  fusing 
with  the  Manichxans.® 

Nevertheless,  though  in  the  fullness  of  his  conscious  superiority  he  had 
underestimated  the  vis  inertm  of  existing  conditions,  his  grand  effort  was  not 
in  vain.  He  was,  like  Paul  before  him  and  Athanasius  after  him,  the  deliverer 
of  Christianity  at  a moment  when  it  threatened  to  break  up,  and  the  grandeur 
of  his  idea  is  in  no  wise  diminished  by  the  fact  that  union  came  about  in  oppo- 
sition to,  instead  of  through,  him.  The  early  Catholic  Church  — - that  is,  the 
Church  of  the  Fseudomorf  hosts  — arose  in  its  greatness  only  about  190,  and  then 

^ Vohu  Mano,  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  in  the  shape  of  the  Saoshyant, 

2 See  the  article  by  Harnack  and  Conybeate  “Manichasism,”  Ency,  Brit.,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 

3 Bardesanes,  too,  and  the  system  of  the  "Acts  of  Thomas"  arc  very  near  to  him  and  to  "John." 
[See  the  articles  "Bardaisan,"  "Thomas,"  and  "Gnosticism,"  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.  —rr.] 

4 Harnack,  p.  24.  The  break  with  the  established  Church  occurred  at  Rome,  in  144. 

^ Harnack,  pp.  18 1,  etseq.  , 

6 It  had,  like  each  of  the  other  Magian  religions,  a script  of  its  own,  and  this  script  steadily 
came  to  resemble  the  Manichasan  more  and  more  closely. 


■1x8  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

it  was  in  self-defence  against  the  Church  of  Marcion  and  with  the  aid  of  an 
organization  taken  from  that  Church.  Further,  it  replaced  Marcion’s  Bible  by 
another  of  similar  structure  — Gospels  and  apostolic  Epistles  — which  it 
then  proceeded  to  combine  with  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  in  one  unit.  And 
finally,  this  act  of  linking  the  two  Testaments  having  in  itself  settled  the 
Church’s  attitude  towards  Judaism,  it  proceeded  to  combat  Marcion’s  third 
creation,  his  Redeemer-doctrine,  by  making  a start  with  a theology  of  its  own 
on  the  basis  of  his  enunciation  of  the  problem. 

This  development,  however,  took  place  on  Classical  soil,  and,  therefore, 
even  the  Church  that  arose  in  opposition  to  Marcion  and  his  anti-Judaism 
was  looked  upon  by  Talmudic  Jewry  (whose  centre  of  gravity  lay  entirely  in 
Mesopotamia  and  its  universities)  as  a mere  piece  of  Hellenistic  paganism. 
The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  a conclusive  event  that  in  the  world  of  fact 
no  spiritual  power  could  nullify.  Such  is  the  intimacy  of  inward  relationship 
between  waking-consciousness,  religion,  and  speech  that  the  complete  sever- 
ance after  70  of  the  Greek  Pseudomorphosis  and  the  Aramaic  (that  is,  the  truly 
Arabian)  region  was  bound  to  result  in  the  formation  of  two  distinct  domains 
of  Magian  religious  development.  On  the  Western  margin  of  the  young 
Culture  the  Pagan  cult-Church,  the  Jesus-Church  (removed  thither  by  Paul), 
and  the  Greek-speaking  Judaism  of  the  Philo  stamp  were  in  point  of  language 
and  literature  so  interlocked  that  the  last-named  fell  into  Christianity  even  in 
the  first  century,  and  Christianity  and  Hellenism  combined  to  form  a common 
early  philosophy.  In  the  Aramaic-speaking  world  from  the  Orontes  to  the 
Tigris,  on  the  other  hand,  Judaism  and  Persism  interacted  constantly  and  inti- 
mately, each  creating  in  this  period  its  own  strict  theology  and  scholastic  in  the 
Talmud  and  the  Avesta;  and  from  the  fourth  century  both  these  theologies  exet-- 
cised.  the  most  potent  influence  upon  the  Aramaic-speaking  Christendom  that  resisted  the 
Pseudomorphosis,  so  that  finally  it  broke  away  in  the  form  of  the  Nestorian  Church. 

Here  in  the  East  the  difference,  inherent  in  every  human  waking-conscious- 
ness, between  sense-understanding  and  word-understanding  — and,  therefore 
between  eye  and  letter  — led  up  to  purely  Arabian  methods  of  mysticism  and 
scholasticism.  The  apocalyptic  certainty,  “Gnosis”  in  the  first-century  sense, 
that  Jesus  intended  to  confer,^  the  divining  contemplation  and  emotion,  is  that 
of  the  Israelite  prophets,  the  Gathas,  Sufism,  and  we  have  it  recognizable  still 
in  Spinoza,  in  the  Polish  Messiah  Baal  Shem  ^ and  in  Mirza  AH  Mohammed, 
the  enthusiast-founder  of  Bahaism,  who  was  executed  in  Teheran  in  1850. 
The  other  way,  “Paradosis,”  is  the  characteristically  Talmudic  method  of 
word-exegesis,  of  which  Paul  was  a master;  ® it  pervades  all  later  Avestan 
works,  the  Nestorian  dialectic,^  the  entire  theology  of  Islam  alike. 

^ Matthew  xi,  15,  et  scq.,  on  which  sec  Eduard  Meyer,  Urspr.  u.  Anf.  d.  Christ.,  pp.  ^86,  et  seq.,* 
here  it  is  the  old  and  Eastern  (i.e.,  the  genuine)  form  of  gnosis  that  is  described, 

^ Sec  further,  below,  p.  311. 

® As  a drastic  instance,  Galatians  iv,  24-2.6. 

* Loofs,  l^estoriana  (1905),  pp.  176,  et  scq. 


HISTORIC  PSEUDOMORPHOSES  xz9 

On  the  other  side,  the  Pseudomorphosis  is  single  and  whole  both  in  its 
Magian  believing  acceptance  (Pistis)  and  its  metaphysical  introversion 
(Gnosis).^  The  Magian  belief  in  its  Westerly  shape  was  formulated  for  the 
Christians  by  Irenasus  and,  above  all,  by  Tertullian,  whose  famous  aphorism 
Credo  quia  absurdum'  is  the  very  summation  of  this  certainty  in  belief.  The 
Pagan  counterpart  is  Plotinus  in  his  Enneads  and  even  more  so  Porphyry  in  his 
treatise  On  the  Return  of  the  Soul  to  God}  But  for  the  great  schoolmen  of  the 
Pagan  Church  too,  there  were  Father  (Nus),  Son,  and  the  middle  Being,  just 
as  already  for  Philo  the  Logos  had  been  first-born  Son  and  second  God.  Doc- 
trines concerning  ecstasy,  angels  and  demons,  and  the  dual  substance  of  soul 
were  freely  current  amongst  them,  and  we  see  in  Plotinus  and  Origen,  both 
pupils  of  the  same  master,  that  the  scholasticism  of  the  Pseudomorphosis 
consisted  in  the  development  of  Magian  concepts  and  thoughts,  by  system- 
atic transvaluation  of  the  texts  of  Plato  and  Aristotle. 

^ The  characteristic  central  idea  of  the  whole  thought  of  the  Pseudomorphosis  is  the 

Logos,^  in  use  and  development  its  faithful  image.  There  is  no  possibility  here 
of  any  ‘‘Greek,*’  in  the  sense  of  Classical,  influence;  there  was  not  a man  alive 
in  those  days  whose  spiritual  disposition  could  have  accommodated  the  smallest 
trace  of  the  Logos  of  Heraclitus  and  the  Stoa.  But,  equally,  the  theologies 
I that  lived  side  by  side  in  Alexandria  were  never  able  to  develop  in  full  purity 

I the  Logos-notion  as  they  meant  it,  whereas  both  in  Persian  and  Chaldean 

I imaginings  — as  Spirit  or  Word  of  God  — and  in  Jewish  doctrine  — as  Ruach 

^ and  Memra  — it  played  a decisive  part.  What  the  Logos-teaching  in  the  West 

j did  was  to  develop  a Classical  formula,  by  way  of  Philo  and  the  John  Gospel 

(the  enduring  effect  of  which  on  the  West  was  its  mark  upon  the  schoolmen) 
not  only  into  an  element  of  Christian  mysticism,  but,  eventually,  into  a dogma.^ 
This  was  inevitable.  This  dogma  which  both  the  Western  Churches  held, 
corresponded,  on  the  side  of  knowledge,  to  that  which,  on  the  side  of  faith,  was 
represented  both  by  the  syncretic  cults  and  the  cults  of  Mary  and  the  Saints.  And 
! against  the  whole  thing,  dogma  and  cult,  the  feeling  of  the  East  revolted  from 

5 the  4th  century  on. 

For  the  eye  the  history  of  these  thoughts  and  feelings  is  repeated  in  the 
history  of  Magian  architecture.^  The  bask  form  of  the  Pseudomorphosis  is  the 
Basilica,  which  was  known  to  the  Jews  of  the  West  and  to  the  Hellenistic  sects 
of  the  Chaldeans  even  before  the  time  of  Christ.  As  the  Logos  of  the  John 
; Gospel  is  a Magian  fundamental  in  Classical  shape,  so  the  Basilica  is  a Magian 

^ The  best  exposition  of  the  mass  of  thought  common  to  both  Churches  is  Windclband's  Ge- 
schichte  der  Fhiloso-phk  (1900),  pp.  177,  ct  seq.;  for  the  dogmatic  history  of  the  Christian  Chruch  sec 
Harnack,  Dogmengeschkhte  (1914),  while  — unconsciously  — Gcffcken  (Der  Msgang  des  griechisch* 
romischen  Heidentums,  192.0)  gives  the  corresponding  “dogmatic  history  of  the  Pagan  Church.*' 

2 Geffckcn,  op.  cit.,  p.  69  [article  “Neoplatonism**  in  Ency,  Brit.,  XI  ed.  — Tr.]. 

3 See  the  following  chapter. 

^ Dogmengeschkhte, -p.  165. 

5 Sec  Vol.  I,  p.  2.09. 


the  decline  of  the  west 

room  whose  inner  walls  correspond  to  the  outer  surfaces  of  the  old  Classical 
temple  the  cult-building  introverted.  The  architectural  form  ^o  t ^ 

is  the  cupola  buildinl  the  Uosiue,  which  without  doubt  existed  long  before 
fhToTdest  Christian  Churches  in  the  temples  of  the  Persians  and  Chaldeans, 
the  synagogues  of  Mesopotamia,  and  probably  the  temples  of  Saba  as  well. 
The  aiSpts  to  reconcile  East  and  West  in  the  Church  Councils  of  the  Byzan- 
tine period  were  finally  symbolized  in  the  mixed  form  of  the  domed  basilica. 
Fo^L  item  of  the  history  of  ecclesiastical  architecture  is  really  another  ex- 
pression of  the  great  change  that  set  in  with  Athanasius  and  Constantine,  the 
last  great  champions  of  Christianity.  The  one  created  the  firm  western  dogma 
and  also  MonaLcism,  into  whose  hands  dogma  gradually  passed  from  those 
S the  ageing  schools.  The  other  founded  the  State  of  Christian  nationality, 
to  which  likewise  the  name  of  “Greek”  passed  in  the  end.  And  of  this  transi- 
tion the  domed  basilica  is  the  symbol. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

PROBLEMS  OF  THE  ARABIAN  CULTURE 


CB) 

THE  MAGIAN  SOUL 


CHAPTER  VIII 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  ARABIAN  CULTURE 

(B) 

THE  MAGIAN  SOUL 

I 

The  world j as  spread  out  for  the  Magian  waking-consciousness,  possesses  a 
kind  of  extension  that  may  be  called  cavern-like/  though  it  is  difScult  for 
Western  man  to  pick  upon  any  word  in  his  vocabulary  that  can  convey  anything 
more  than  a hint  of  the  meaning  of  Magian  ''space."  For  "space"  has  essen- 
tially unlike  meanings  for  the  perceptions  of  the  two  Cultures.  The  world- 
as-cavern  is  just  as  different  from  the  world-as-extent  of  the  passionate, 
far-thrusting  Faustian  as  it  is  from  the  Classical  world-as-sum-of-bodily-things. 
The  Copernican  system,  in  which  the  earth,  as  it  were,  loses  itself,  must  neces- 
sarily seem  crazy  and  frivolous  to  Arabian  thought.  The  Church  of  the  West 
was  perfectly  right  when  it  resisted  an  idea  so  incompatible  with  the  world- 
feeling  of  Jesus,  and  the  Chaldean  cavern-astronomy ^ which  was  wholly  natural 
and  convincing  for  Persians,  Jews,  peoples  of  the  Pseudomorphosis,  and  Islam, 
became  accessible  to  the  few  genuine  Greeks  who  knew  of  it  at  all  only  after  a 
process  of  transvaluing  its  basic  notions  of  space. 

The  tension  between  Macrocosm  and  Microcosm  (which  is  identical  with 
the  waking-consciousness)  leads,  in  the  world-picture  of  every  Culture,  to  fur- 
ther oppositions  of  symbolic  importance.  All  a man’s  sensations  or  under- 
standing, faith  or  knowledge,  receive  their  shape  from  a primary  opposition 
which  makes  them  not  only  activities  of  the  individual,  but  also  expressions  of 
the  totality.  In  the  Classical  the  opposition  that  universally  dominates  the 
waking-consciousness  is  the  opposition  of  matter  and  form;  in  the  West  it  is 
that  of  force  and  mass.  In  the  former  the  tension  loses  itself  in  the  small  and 
particular,  and  in  the  latter  it  discharges  itself  in  the  character  of  work.  In  the 
World-Cavern,  on  the  other  hand,  it  persists  in  traversing  and  swaying  to  and 
fro  in  unsure  stragglings,  and  so  becomes  that  "Semitic"  primary-dualism 
which,  ever  the  same  under  its  thousand  forms,  fills  the  Magian  world.  The 
light  shines  through  the  cavern  and  battles  against  the  darkness  (John  i,  5). 
Both  are  Magian  substances.  Up  and  down,  heaven  and  earth  become  powers 
that  have  entity  and  contend  with  one  another.  But  these  polarities  in  the 
most  primary  sensations  mingle  with  those  of  the  refined  and  critical  under- 

^ The  expression  is  Ixo  Frobenius^s  CPaidemnji,  1910,  p.  92.).  [Sec  Vol.  I,  p.  184.  — Tf.] 

3^33 


134  : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

standing,  like  good  and  evil,  God  and  Satan.  Death,  for  the  author  of  the 
John  Gospel  as  for  the  strict  Moslem,  is  not  the  end  of  life,  but  a Something,  a 
death-force,  that  contends  with  a life-force  for  the  possession  of  man. 

But  still  more  important  than  all  this  is  the  opposition  of  Spirit  and  Soul 
'RMach  znA  nefheshy  Persian  ahu  and  urvan^  Mandasan  monuhmed  and 
Greek  pnet^ma  and  psyche)  which  first  comes  out  in  the  basic  feeling  of  the 
prophetic  religions,  then  pervades  the  whole  of  Apocalyptic,  and  finally  forms 
and  guides  the  world-contemplations  of  the  awakened  Culture  — Philo,  Paul 
and  Plotinus,  Gnostics  and  Mandaeans,  Augustine  and  the  Avesta,  Islam  and 
the  Kabbalah.  RMach  means  originally  “wind”  and  nephesh  “breath.”  ^ The 
nephesh  is  always  in  one  way  or  another  related  to  the  bodily  and  earthly,  to 
the  below,  the  evil,  the  darkness.  Its  effort  is  the  “upward.”  The  mach 
belongs  to  the  divine,  to  the  above,  to  the  light.  Its  effects  in  man  when  it 
descends  are  the  heroism  of  a Samson,  the  holy  wrath  of  an  Elijah,  the  enlight- 
enment of  the  judge  (the  Solomon  passing  judgment,^)  and  all  kinds  of  divina- 
tion and  ecstasy.  It  is  poured  out.^  From  Isaiah  xi,  z,  the  Messiah  becomes 
the  incarnation  of  the  mach.  Philo  and  the  Islamic  theology  divide  mankind 
into  born  Psychics  and  born  Pneumatics  (the  “elect,”  a concept  thoroughly 
proper  to  the  world-cavern  and  Kismet).  All  the  sons  of  Jacob  are  pneumatics. 
For  Paul  (i  Cor.  xv)  the  meaning  of  the  Resurrection  lies  in  the  opposition  of  a 
psychic  and  a pneumatic  body,  which  alike  for  him  and  Philo  and  the  author 
of  the  Baruch  apocalypse  coincides  with  the  opposition  of  heaven  and  earth, 
light  and  darkness.'^  For  Paul,  the  Saviour  is  the  heavenly  Pneuma.®  In  the 
John  Gospel  he  fuses  as  Logos  with  the  Light;  in  Neoplatonism  he  appears 
as  Nus  or,  in  the  Classical  terminology,  the  All-One  opposed  to  Physis.^  Paul 
and  Philo,  with  their  “ Classical”  (that  is,  western)  conceptual  criteria,  equated 
soul  and  body  with  good  and  bad  respectively,  Augustine,  as  a Manichacan  ^ 
with  Persian-Eastern  bases  of  distinction,  lumps  soul  and  body  together  as 
the  naturally  bad,  in  contrast  to  God  as  the  sole  Good,  and  finds  in  this  oppo- 
sition the  source  of  his  doctrine  of  Grace,  which  developed  also,  in  the  same 
form  (though  quite  independently  of  him)  in  Islam. 

But  souls  are  at  bottom  discrete  entities,  whereas  the  Pneuma  is  one  and 

^ The  soul-stones  on  Jewish,  Sabasan,  and  Islamic  tombs  are  also  called  nephesh.  They  are  un- 
mistakable symbols  of  the  “upward.”  With  them  belong  the  huge  storeyed  stela?  of  Axum  which 
belong  to  the  first  to  third  centuries  of  our  era  — i.c.,  the  great  period  of  the  early  Magian  religions. 
The  giant  stele,  long  overthrown,  is  the  largest  monolith  known  to  art-history,  larger  than  any 
Egyptian  obelisk  (German  Axum  Expedition  report,  VoL  11,  pp.  i8,  et  seq.). 

^ On  this  rests  the  whole  theory  and  practice  of  Magian  law  (see  p.  72.  above). 

* Isaiah  xxxii,  15;  4 Ezra  xiv,  39;  Acts  ii. 

^ Keitzenstdn  Das  iran.  Erlosmgsmjsferium,  pp.  loB,  ct  seq. 

® Bousset,  Kjmj- CMVrw,  p.  142. 

® Windelband,  Gesch.  d.  Phil.  (1900),  pp.  189,  ct  seq.;  Windclband-Bonhoffer,  Gesch.  d.  antiken 
Phil.  (i9ix),  pp.  328,  ct  seq.;  Geffckcn,  D<ff  Heidentums  (1920),  pp,  51,  ct  seq. 

]odl,Gescbichte  der  Ethik^ly-p. 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  135 

ever  the  same.  The  man  possesses  a soul,  but  he  only  participates  in  the  spirit 
of  the  Light  and  the  Good;  the  divine  descends  into  him,  thus  binding  all  the 
individuals  of  the  Below  together  with  the  one  in  the  Above.  This  primary 
feeling,  which  dominates  the  beliefs  and  opinions  of  all  Magian  men,  is  some- 
thing perfectly  singular,  and  not  only  characterizes  their  world-view,  but 
marks  off  the  essence  and  kernel  of  their  religiousness  in  all  its  forms  from  that 
of  every  other  kind  of  man.  This  Culture,  as  has  been  shown,  was  characteris- 
tically the  Culture  of  the  middle.  It  could  have  borrowed  forms  and  ideas 
from  most  of  the  others,  and  the  fact  that  it  did  not  do  so,  that  in  the  face  of  all 
pressure  and  temptation  it  remained  so  profoundly  mistress  of  its  own  inward 
form,  attests  an  unbridgeable  gulf  of  difference.  Of  all  the  wealth  of  Babylonian 
and  Egyptian  religion  it  admitted  hardly  more  than  a few  names;  the  Classical 
and  the  Indian  Cultures,  or  rather  the  Civilizations  heir  to  them  —■  Hellenism 
and  Buddhism  — distorted  its  expression  to  the  point  of  pseudomorphosis,  but 
its  essence  they  never  touched.  All  religions  of  the  Magian  Culture,  from  the 
creations  of  Isaiah  and  Zarathustra  to  Islam,  constitute  a complete  inward 
unit  of  world-feeling;  and,  just  as  in  the  Avestan  beliefs  there  is  not  to  be  found 
one  trait  of  Brahmanism  nor  in  early  Christianity  one  breath  of  Classical  feeling, 
but  merely  names  and  figures  and  outward  forms,  so  also  not  a trace  of  this 
Jesus-religion  could  be  absorbed  by  the  Germanic-Catholic  Christianity  of  the 
West,  even  though  the  stock  of  tenets  and  observances  was  taken  over  in  its 
entirety. 

Whereas  the  Faustian  man  is  an  “F’  that  in  the  last  resort  draws  its  own 
conclusions  about  the  Infinite;  whereas  the  Apollinian  man,  as  one  soma  among 
many,  represents  only  himself;  the  Magian  man,  with  his  spiritual  kind  of 
being,  is  only  a part  of  a pneumatic  that,  descending  from  above,  is  one 

and  the  same  in  all  believers.  As  body  and  soul  he  belongs  to  himself  alone, 
but  something  else,  something  alien  and  higher,  dwells  in  him,  making  him 
with  all  his  glimpses  and  convictions  just  a member  of  a consensus  which,  as 
the  emanation  of  God,  excludes  error,  but  excludes  also  all  possibility  of  the 
self-asserting  Ego.  Truth  is  for  him  something  other  than  for  us.  All  our 
epistemological  methods,  resting  upon  the  judgment,  are  for  him 

madness  and  infatuation,  and  its  scientific  results  a work  of  the  Evil  One, 
who  has  confused  and  deceived  the  spirit  as  to  its  true  dispositions  and  purposes. 
Herein  lies  the  ultimate,  for  us  unapproachable,  secret  of  Magian  thought  in  its 
cavern-world  — the  impossibility  of  a thinking,  believing,  and  knowing  Ego 
is  the  presupposition  inherent  in  all  the  fundamentals  of  all  these  religions. 
While  Classical  man  stood  before  his  gods  as  one  body  before  another;  whereas 
the  Faustian  willing  “F*  in  its  wide  world  feels  itself  confronted  by  deity,  also 
Faustian,  also  willing,  effective  everywhere;  the  Magian  deity  is  the  indefinite, 
enigmatic  Power  on  high  that  pours  out  its  Wrath  or  its  Grace,  descends  itself 
into  the  dark  or  raises  the  soul  into  the  light  as  it  sees  fit.  The  idea  of  individual 


x36  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST  ' 

wills  is  simply  meaningless,  for  '‘will*’  and  '‘thought'"  in  man  are  not  prime, 
but  already  effects  of  the  deity  upon  him.  Out  of  this  unshakable  root-feeling, 
which  is  merely  re-expressed,  never  essentially  altered,  by  any  conversions, 
illumination  or  subtilizing  in  the  world  — there  emerges  of  necessity  the  idea 
of  the  Divine  Mediator,  of  one  who  transforms  this  state  from  a torment  into 
a bliss.  All  Magian  religions  are  by  this  idea  bound  together,  and  separated 
from  those  of  all  other  Cultures. 

The  Logos-idea  in  its  broadest  sense,  an  abstraction  of  the  Magian  light- 
sensation  of  the  Cavern,  is  the  exact  correlative  of  this  sensation  in  Magian 
thought.  It  meant  that  from  the  unattainable  Godhead  its  Spirit,  its  “Word,” 
is  released  as  carrier  of  the  light  and  bringer  of  the  good,  and  enters  into  rela- 
tion with  human  being  to  uplift,  pervade,  and  redeem  it.  This  distinctness  of 
three  substances,  which  does  not  contradict  their  oneness  in  religious  thought, 
was  known  already  to  the  prophetic  religions.  Ahuramazda’s  light-gleaming 
soul  is  the  Word  (Yasht  13,  31),  and  in  one  of  the  earliest  Gathas  his  Holy 
Spirit  (spnta  mainyu)  converses  with  the  Evil  Spirit  (angra  mainyu^  Yasna  45,  x). 
The  same  idea  penetrates  the  whole  of  the  old  Jewish  literature.  The  thought 
which  the  Chaldeans  built  up  on  the  separation  of  God  and  His  Word  and  the 
opposition  of  Marduk  and  Nabu,  which  breaks  forth  with  power  in  the  whole 
Aramasan  Apocalyptic  remained  permanently  active  and  creative;  by  Philo 
and  John,  Marcion  and  Mani,  it  entered  into  the  Talmudic  teachings  and  thence 
into  the  Kabbalistic  books  Yesirah  and  Sohar,  into  the  Church  Councils  and  the 
works  of  the  Fathers,  into  the  later  Avesta,  and  finally  into  Islam,  in  which  a 
Mohammed  gradually  became  the  Logos  and,  as  the  mystically  respent,  living 
Mohammed  of  the  popular  religion,  fused  into  the  figure  of  Christ.^  This 
conception  is  for  Magian  man  so  self-evident  that  it  was  able  to  break  through 
even  the  strictly  monotheistic  structure  of  the  original  Islam  and  to  appear  with 
Allah  as  the  Word  of  God  (kalimah')^  the  Holy  Spirit  (ruh\  and  the  “light  of 
Mohammed.” 

For,  for  the  popular  religion,  the  first  light  that  comes  forth  from  the 
world-creation  is  that  of  Mohammed,  in  the  shape  of  a peacock  ^ “formed  of 
white  pearls”  and  walled  about  by  veilings.  But  the  peacock  is  the  Envoy 
of  God  and  the  prime  soul  ® as  early  as  the  Mandasans,  and  it  is  the  emblem  of 
immortality  on  Early  Christian  sarcophagi.  The  light-diffusing  pearl  that 
illumines  the  dark  house  of  the  body  is  the  Spirit  entered  into  man,  and  thought 
of  as  substance,  for  the  Mandasans  as  in  the  Acts  of  Thomas.^  The  Jezidi  ^ 

^ M.  Horten,  Die  religiose  Gedankenwelt  der  Yolkes  im  heutigen  Islam  pp.  381,  et  scq.  By  the 

Shiites  the  Logos-idea  was  transferred  to  Ali. 

^ Msihammedanische  Eschatologie,  y^%^ 

3 Mand^an  Book  of  John,  Ch.  LXXV. 

3 Usener,  Vortr.  u.  Aufs.,  p.  117. 

* The  “devil-worshippers"  in  Armenia;  M.  Horten  in  Der  nem  Orient  (March  1518).  The  name 
arose  from  the  fact  that  they  did  not  recognize  Satan  as  a being,  and  accordingly  derived  the  Evil, 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  ^37 

reverence  the  Logos  as  peacock  and  light;  next  to  the  Druses  they  have  pre- 
served most  purely  the  old  Persian  conception  of  the  substantial  Trinity. 

Thus  again  and  again  we  find  the  Logos-idea  getting  back  to  the  light- 
sensation  from  which  the  Magian  understanding  derived  it.  The  world  of  Magian 
mankind  is  filled  with  a fairy-tale  feeling.^  Devils  and  evil  spirits  threaten  man; 
angels  and  fairies  protect  him.  There  are  amulets  and  talismans,  mysterious 
lands,  cities,  buildings,  and  beings,  secret  letters,  Solomon’s  Seal,  the  Philoso- 
phers’ Stone.  And  over  all  this  is  poured  the  quivering  cavern-light  that  the 
spectral  darkness  ever  threatens  to  swallow  up.  If  this  profusion  of  figures 
astonishes  the  reader,  let  him  remember  that  Jesus  lived  in  it,  and  Jesus’s  teach- 
ings are  only  to  be  understood  from  it.  Apocalyptic  is  only  a vision  of  fable 
intensified  to  an  extreme  of  tragic  power.  Already  in  the  Book  of  Enoch  we 
have  the  crystal  palace  of  God,  the  mountains  of  precious  stone,  and  the  im- 
prisonment of  the  apostate  stars.  Fantastic,  too,  are  the  whole  overpowering 
idea-world  of  the  Mandasans,  that  of  the  Gnostics  and  the  Manicha^ans,  the 
system  of  Origen,  and  the  figures  of  the  Persian  ''Bundahish”;  and  when  the 
time  of  the  great  visions  was  over,  these  ideas  passed  into  a legend-poesy  and 
into  the  innumerable  religious  romances  of  which  we  have  Christian  specimens 
in  the  gospels  concerning  Jesus’s  childhood,  the  Acts  of  Thomas  and  the  anti- 
Pauline  Pseudo-Clementines.  One  such  story  is  that  of  Abraham’s  having 
minted  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  of  Judas.  Another  is  the  tale  of  the  “treasure- 
cave”  in  which,  deep  under  the  hill  of  Golgotha,  are  stored  the  golden  treasure 
of  paradise  and  the  bones  of  Adam.^  Dante’s  poetic  material  was  after  ail  poetic, 
but  this  was  sheer  actuality,  the  only  world  in  which  these  people  lived  con- 
tinuously. Such  sensations  are  unapproachably  remote  from  men  who  live  in 
and  with  a dynamical  world-picture.  If  we  would  obtain  some  inkling  of  how 
alien  to  us  all  the  inner  life  of  Jesus  is  — a painful  realization  for  the  Christian 
of  the  West,  who  would  be  glad  indeed  if  he  could  make  that  inner  life  the 
point  of  contact  for  his  own  inward  piety  ~ if  we  would  discover  why  now- 
adays only  a pious  Moslem  has  the  capacity  livingly  to  experience  it,  we  should 
sink  ourselves  in  this  wonder-element  of  a world-image  that  was  Jesus’s  world- 
image.  And  then,  and  only  then,  shall  we  perceive  how  little  Faustian  Chris- 
tianity has  taken  over  from  the  wealth  of  the  Church  of  the  Pseudomorphosis 
— of  its  world-feeling  nothing,  of  its  inward  form  little,  and  of  its  concepts 
and  figures  much. 

by  a very  complicated  set  of  ideas,  from  the  Logos  itself.  Under  old  Persian  influences  the  Jews 
also  busied  themselves  with  the  same  problem  — observe  the  difference  between  % Samuel  xxiv,  i, 
and  I Chron.  xxi,  i. 

^ M-  Horten,  op.  cit.,  p.  xxi.  This  book  is  the  best  introduction  to  the  actually  existing  popu- 
lar religion  of  Islam,  which  deviates  considerably  from  the  official  doctrines. 

2 J T)ie  christL  Literaturm  des  Orients^  I,  P*  ^4. 


THE  DECLINE-  OF  THE  WEST 


138 

n 

The  When,  for  the  Magian  Soul,  issues  from  the  Where.  Here  too,  is  no 
Apollinian  clinging  to  pointlike  Present,  nor  Faustian  thrust  and  drive  towards 
an  infinitely  distant  goal.  Here  Being  has  a different  pulse,  and  consequently 
Waking-being  has  another  sense  of  time,  which  is  the  counter-concept  to 
Magian  space.  The  prime  thing  that  the  humanity  of  this  Culture,  from 
poor  slaves  and  porters  to  the  prophets  and  the  caliphs  themselves,  feels  as  the 
Kismet  above  him  is  not  a limitless  flight  of  the  ages  that  never  lets  a lost  mo- 
ment recur,  but  a Beginning  and  an  End  of  “This  Day,”  which  is  irrevocably 
ordained  and  in  which  the  human  existence  takes  the  place  assigned  to  it  from 
creation  itself.  Not  only  world-space,  but  world-time  also  is  cavern-like. 
Hence  comes  the  thoroughly  Magian  certainty  everything  has  time^ 
from  the  origins  of  the  Saviour,  whose  hour  stood  written  in  ancient  texts,  to 
the  smallest  detail  of  the  everyday,  in  which  Faustian  hurry  would  be  meaning- 
less and  unimaginable.  Here,  too,  is  the  basis  of  the  Early  Magian  (and  in 
particular  the  Chaldean)  astrology,  which  likewise  presupposes  that  all  things 
are  written  down  in  the  stars  and  that  the  scientifically  calculable  course  of 
the  planets  authorized  conclusions  as  to  the  course  of  earthly  things.^  The 
Classical  oracle  answered  the  only  question  that  could  perturb  Apollinian  man 
— the  form,  the  “ How?”  of  coming  things.  But  the  question  of  the  Cavern  is 
“When?”  The  whole  of  Apocalyptic,  the  spiritual  life  of  Jesus,  the  agony  of 
Gethsemane,  and  the  grand  movement  that  arose  out  of  his  death  are  unintelligi- 
ble if  we  have  not  grasped  this  primary  question  of  Magian  being  and  the 
presuppositions  lying  behind  it.  It  is  an  infallible  sign  of  the  extinction  of  the 
Classical  Soul  that  astrology  in  its  westward  advance  drove  the  oracle  step  by 
step  before  it.  Nowhere  is  the  stage  of  transition  more  clearly  visible  than  in 
Tacitus,  whose  entire  history  is  dominated  by  the  confusion  and  dislocation 
of  his  world-picture.  First  of  all,  as  a true  Roman,  he  brings  in  the  power  of 
the  old  city-deities;  then,  as  an  intelligent  cosmopolitan,  he  regards  this 
very  belief  in  their  intervention  as  a superstition;  and  finally,  as  a Stoic  (by 
that  time  the  spiritual  outlook  of  the  Stoa  had  become  he  speaks  of 

the  power  of  the  seven  planets  that  rule  the  fortunes  of  men.  And  thus  it  comes 
about  that  in  the  following  centuries  Time  itself  as  vessel  of  fate  — namely  the 
Vault  of  Time,  limited  each  way  and  therefore  capable  of  being  grasped  as  an 
entity  by  the  inner  eye  — is  by  Persian  mysticism  set  above  the  light  of  God 
as  Zrvan,  and  rules  the  world-conflict  of  Good  and  Evil,  Zrvanism  was  the 
State  religion  of  Persia  in  438-457. 

^ Cf.  p.  Z05.  The  Babylonian  view  of  the  heavens  had  not  definitely  distinguished  between 
astronomical  and  atmospheric  elements;  e.g.,  the  covering  of  the  moon  by  clouds  was  regarded  as 
a kind  of  eclipse.  For  this  soothsaying  the  momentary  of  the  heavens  served  only  the  same 
purpose  as  the  inspection  of  the  victim’s  liver.  But  the  Chaldeans’  intention  was  to  forecast  the 
actual  course  of  the  stars;  here,  therefore,  astrology  presupposed  a genuine  astronomy. 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  Z39 

Fundamentally,  too,  it  is  this  belief  that  all  stands  written  in  the  stars,  that 
makes  the  Arabian  Culture  characteristically  that  of  “ eras”  — that  is,  of  time- 
reckonings  that  begin  at  some  event  felt  as  a peculiarly  significant  act  of  Provi- 
dence. The  first  and  most  important  is  the  generic  Aramasan  era,  which  begins 
about  300  B.c.  with  the  growth  of  apocalyptic  tension  and  is  the  “Seleucid  era,” 
It  was  followed  by  many  others,  amongst  them  the  Sabasan  (about  115  b.c.), 
the  starting-point  of  which  is  not  exactly  known  to  us;  that  of  Diocletian;  the 
Jewish  era,  beginning  with  the  Creation,  which  was  introduced  by  the  Syned- 
rion  in  346;  V the  Persian,  from  the  accession  of  the  last  Sassanid  Jezdegerd  in 
63z;  and  the  Hijra,  by  which  at  last  the  Seleucid  was  displaced  in  Syria  and 
Mesopotamia.  Outside  this  land-field  there  is  mere  imitation  for  practical  ends, 
like  Varro’s  ''  ah  urhe  condita';  that  of  the  Marcionites,  beginning  with  Mar- 
cion’s  breach  with  the  Church  in  144;  and  that  of  the  Christians,  introduced 
shortly  after  500  and  beginning  with  the  birth  of  Jesus. 

World-history  is  the  picture  of  the  living  world  into  which  man  sees  himself 
woven  by  birth,  ancestry,  and  progeny,  and  which  he  strives  to  comprehend 
from  out  of  his  world-feeling.  The  historical  picture  of  Classical  man  concen- 
trates itself  upon  the  pure  Present.  Its  content  is  no  true  Becoming,  but  a fore- 
ground Being  with  a conclusive  background  of  timeless  myth,  rationalized  as 
“the  Golden  Age.”  This  Being,  however,  was  a variegated  swarming  of  ups 
and  downs,  good  and  ill  fortune,  a blind  “ thereabouts,”  an  eternal  alteration, 
yet  ever  in  its  changes  the  same,  without  direction,  goal,  or  “Time.”  The 
cavern-feeling,  on  the  contrary,  requires  a surveyable  history  consisting  in  a 
beginning  and  an  end  to  the  world  that  is  also  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  man  — 
acts  of  God  of  mighty  magic  — and  between  these  turns,  spellbound  to  the 
limits  of  the  Cavern  and  the  ordained  period,  the  battle  of  light  and  darkness,  of 
the  angels  and  Jazatas  with  Ahriman,  Satan,  and  Eblis,  in  which  Man,  his 
Soul,  and  his  Spirit  are  involved.  The  present  Cavern  God  can  destroy  and  re- 
place by  a new  creation.  The  Persian-Chaldean  apocalyptic  offers  to  the  gaze 
a whole  series  of  such  asons,  and  Jesus,  along  with  his  time,  stood  in  expectation 
of  the  end  of  the  existing  one.^  The  consequence  of  this  is  a historic  outlook 
like  that  which  is  natural  to  Islam  even  to-day  -—  the  view  over  a given  time. 
“The  world-view  of  the  people  falls  naturally  into  three  major  parts  — world- 
beginning, world-development,  and  world-catastrophe.  For  the  Moslem  who 
feels  so  deeply  ethically,  the  chief  essentials  in  world-development  are  the  sal- 
vation-story and  the  ethical  way  of  life,  knit  into  one  as  the  “life”  of  man. 

^ B.  Cohn,  “Ditf  Anfangse-poche  der  jud.  Kalenders*\  Ft.  Akad.,  1914)-  The  date  of  the  fitst 

day  of  Creation  was  on  this  occasion  fixed  by  calculation  fiom  a total  eclipse  of  the  sun  — of  course 
with  the  aid  of  Chaldean  astronomy.  [See,  in  general,  the  articles  “Chronology,"  “Calendar,” 
in  Ency.  XL  cd. — Tr.] 

2 The  Persian  notion  of  total  time  is  11,000  years.  The  Parsecs  of  to-day  consider  a.d,  1910  as 
the  11,550th. 


Z40  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

This  debouches  into  the  world-catastrophe,  which  contains  the  sanction  of  the 

moral  history  of  humanity.”  ^ 

But,  further,  for  the  Magian  human-existence,  the  issue  of  the  feeling  of  this 
sort  of  Time  and  the  view  of  this  sort  of  space  is  a quite  peculiar  type  of  piety, 
which  likewise  we  may  put  under  the  sign  of  the  Cavern  — a will4ess  resigna- 
tion, to  which  the  spiritual  “I”  is  unknown,  and  which  feels  the  spiritual 
We”  that  has  entered  into  the  quickened  body  as  simply  a reflection  of  the 
divine  Light.  The  Arab  word  for  this  is  Islam  (=  submission)  but  this  Islam 
was  equally  Jesus’s  normal  mode  of  feeling  and  that  of  every  other  personality 
of  religious  genius  that  appeared  in  this  Culture,  Classical  piety  is  something 
perfectly  different,^  while,  as  for  that  of  our  own  Culture,  if  we  could  mentally 
abstract  from  the  piety  of  St.  Theresa  and  Luther  and  Pascal  their  Ego  — that 
Ego  which  wills  to  maintain  itself  against,  to  submit  to,  or  even  to  be  extin- 
guished by  the  Divine  Infinite  — there  would  be  nothing  left.  The  Faustian 
prime-sacrament  of  Contrition  presupposes  the  strong  and  free  will  that  can 
overcome  itself.  But  it  is  precisely  the  impossibility  of  an  Ego  as  a free  power  in 
the  face  of  the  divine  that  constitutes  **  Islam.  ’ ’ Every  attempt  to  meet  the  opera- 
tions of  God  with  a personal  purpose  or  even  a personal  opinion  is  '*  masigaf'  — 
that  is,  not  an  evil  willing,  but  an  evidence  that  the  powers  of  darkness  and  evil 
have  taken  possession  of  a man  and  expelled  the  divine  from  him.  The  Magian 
waking-consciousness  is  merely  the  theatre  of  a battle  between  these  two  powers 
and  not,  so  to  say,  a power  in  itself.  Moreover,  in  this  kind  of  world-happening 
there  is  no  place  for  individual  causes  and  effects,  let  alone  any  universally 
effective  dynamic  concatenation  thereof,  and  consequently  there  is  no  necessary 
connexion  between  sin  and  punishment,  no  claim  to  reward,  no  old-Israelitish 
“righteousness.”  Things  of  this  order  the  true  piety  of  this  Culture  regards  as 
far  beneath  it.  The  laws  of  nature  are  not  something  settled  for  ever  that  God 
can  alter  only  by  the  method  of  miracle  — they  are  (so  to  put  it)  the  ordinary 
state  of  an  autocratic  divine  will,  not  possessing  in  themselves  anything  of  the 
logical  necessity  that  they  have  for  Faustian  souls.  In  the  entire  world-cavern 
there  is  but  one  Cause,  which  lies  immediately  behind  all  visible  workings,  and 
this  is  the  Godhead,  which,  as  itself,  acts  without  causes.  Even  to  speculate 
upon  causes  in  connexion  with  God  is  sinful. 

From  this  basic  feeling  proceeds  the  Magian  idea  of  Grace.  This  underlies 
all  sacraments  of  this  Culture  (especially  the  Magian  proto-sacrament  of  Bap- 
tism) and  forms  a contrast  of  the  deepest  intensity  with  the  Faustian  idea  of 
Contrition.  Contrition  presupposes  the  will  of  an  Ego,  but  Grace  knows  of  no 
such  thing.  It  was  Augustine’s  high  achievement  to  develop  this  essentially 
Islamic  thought  with  an  inexorable  logic,  and  with  a penetration  so  thorough 

^ M.  Hoftea,  Die  religiose  Gedanhnwelt  des  Volhs  im  heutigen  Islam^  p.  xxvi. 

® It  shows  a great  gap  in  our  research  that  although  we  possess  a whole  library  of  works  on 
Classical  religion  and  particularly  its  gods  and  cults,  we  have  not  one  about  Classical  religiousness 
and  its  history. 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  Mx 

that  since  Pelagins  the  Faustian  Soul  has  tried  by  any  and  every  route  to  Gircum- 
vent  this  certainty  — which  for  it  constitutes  an  imminent  danger  of  self- 
destruction  — and  in  using  Augustinian  propositions  to  express  its  own  proper 
consciousness  of  God  has  ever  misunderstood  and  transvalued  them.  Actually, 
Augustine  was  the  last  great  thinker  of  Early  Arabian  Scholasticism,  anything 
but  a Western  intellect.^  Not  only  was  he  at  times  a Manichasan,  but  he  re- 
mained so  even  as  a Christian  in  some  important  characteristics,  and  his  closest 
relations  are  to  be  found  amongst  the  Persian  theologians  of  the  later  Avesta, 
with  their  doctrines  of  the  Store  of  Grace  of  the  Holy  and  of  absolute  guilt.  For 
him  grace  is  the  substantial  inflowing  of  something  divine  into  the  human 
Pneuma,  itself  also  substantial.^  The  Godhead  radiates  it;  man  receives  it,  but 
does  not  acquire  it.  From  Augustine,  as  from  Spinoza  so  many  centuries  later, ^ 
the  notion  of  force  is  absent,  and  for  both  the  problem  of  freedom  refers  not  to 
the  Ego  and  its  Will,  but  to  the  part  of  the  universal  Pneuma  that  is  infused  into 
a man  and  its  relation  to  the  rest  of  him.  Magian  waking-being  is  the  theatre  of 
a conflict  between  the  two  world-substances  of  light  and  darkness.  The  Early 
Faustian  thinkers  such  as  Duns  Scotus  and  William  of  Occam,  on  the  contrary, 
see  a contest  inherent  in  dynamic  waking-consciousness  itself^  a contest  of  the 
two  forces  of  the  Ego  — namely,  will  and  reason,^  and  so  imperceptibly  the 
question  posed  by  Augustine  changes  into  another,  which  he  himself  would  have 
been  incapable  of  understanding  — are  willing  and  thinking  free  forces,  or  are 
they  not  ? Answer  this  question  as  we  may,  one  thing  at  any  rate  is  certain,  that 
the  individual  ego  has  to  wage  this  war  and  not  to  suffer  it.  The  Faustian  Grace 
refers  to  the  success  of  the  Will  and  not  to  the  species  of  a substance.  Says  the 

^ “He  is  in  truth  the  conclusion  and  completion  of  the  Christian  Classical,  its  last  and  greatest 
thinker,  its  intellectual  practitioner  and  tribune.  This  is  the  starting-point  from  which  he  must  be 
understood.  What  later  ages  have  made  of  him  is  another  affair.  His  own  real  mind,  the  syn- 
thesizer of  Classical  Culture,  ecclesiastical  and  episcopal  authority,  and  intimate  mysticism,  could 
not  possibly  have  been  handed  on  by  those  who,  environed  by  different  conditions,  have  to  deal 
with  different  tasks”  (E.  Troeltsch,  Augustin,  die  christliche  Antikeunddas  Mittelalter,  1915,  p.  7). 
His  power,  like  Tertullian’s,  rested  also  on  the  fact  that  his  writings  were  not  translated  into  Latin, 
but  thought  in  this  language,  the  sacred  language  of  the  Western  Church;  it  was  precisely  this  that 
excluded  both  from  the  field  of  Aramaean  thought.  Cf.  p,  12.4  above. 

^ Inspiratio  bona  voluntatis'^  (JDe  corr.  et  grat.,  His  “good  will”  and  “ill  will”  are,  quite 
dualistically,  a pair  of  opposite  substances.  For  Pelagius,  on  the  contrary,  will  is  an  activity  without 
moral  quality  as  such;  only  that  which  is  willed  has  the  property  of  being  good  or  evil,  and  the 
Grace  of  God  consists  in  the  " possibilitas  utriusque  partis,"  the  freedom  to  will  this  or  that.  Gregory 
I transmuted  Augustinian  doctrines  into  Faustian  when  he  taught  that  God  rejected  individuals 
because  he  foreknew  their  evil  will. 

® All  the  elements  of  the  Magian  metaphysic  arc  to  be  found  in  Spinoza,  hard  as  he  tried  to 
replace  the  Arabian-Jewish  conceptual  world  of  his  Spanish  masters  (and  above  all  Moses  Maimon- 
ides)  by  the  Western  of  early  Baroque.  The  individual  human  mind  is  for  him  not  an  ego,  but  only 
a mode  of  the  one  divine  attribute,  the  "cogitatio"  — which  is  just  the  Pneuma,  He  protests  against 
notions  like  “God's  Will.”  His  God  is  pure  substance  and  in  lieu  of  the  dynamic  causality  of  the 
Faustian  universe  he  discovers  simply  the  logic  of  the  divine  cogitatio.  All  this  is  already  in  Por- 
phyry, in  the  Talmud,  in  Islam;  and  to  Faustian  thinkers  like  Leibniz  and  Goethe  it  is  as  alien  as 
anything  can  possibly  be.  (jillgem,  Gesch.  d.  Fhilos,  in  'Ksiltur  der  Gegenwa^t,  I,  v,  p,  484,  Windelband.) 

^ Here,  therefore,  “good"  is  an  evaluation  and  not  a substance. 


2.4X  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

Westminster  Confession  of  the  Presbyterians  (1646};  ‘‘The  rest  of  Mankind, 
God  was  pleased,  according  to  the  unsearchable  Counsel  of  his  own  Will, 
whereby  he  extendeth,  or  withholdeth  Mercy,  as  he  pleaseth,  for  the.  Glory 
of  his  Sovereign  Power  over  his  Creatures,  to  pass  by;  and  to  ordain  them  to 
Dishonour  and  Wrath,  for  their  Sin,  to  the  Praise  of  his  glorious  Justice.’; 
The  other  conception,  that  the  idea  of  Grace  excludes  every  individual  will  and 
every  cause  but  the  One,  that  it  is  sinful  even  to  question  why  man  suffers,  finds 
an  expression  in  one  of  the  most  powerful  poems  known  to  world-history,  a 
poem  that  came  into  being  in  the  midst  of  the  Arabian  pre-Culture  and  is  in 
inward  grandeur  unparalleled  by  any  product  of  that  Culture  itself  — the  Book 
of  Job.^  It  is  not  Job,  but  his  friends  who  look  for  a sin  as  the  cause  of  his 
troubles.  They — ^ like  the  bulk  of  mankind  in  this  and  every  other  Culture, 
present-day  readers  and  critics  of  the  work,  therefore,  included  — lack  the 
metaphysical  depth  to  get  near  the  ultimate  meaning  of  suffering  within  the 
world-'Cavern,  Only  the  Hero  himself  fights  through  the  fulfilment,  to  pure 
Islam,  and  he  becomes  thereby  the  only  possible  figure  of  tragedy  that  Magian 
feeling  can  set  up  by  the  side  of  our  FaustJ 

III 

The  waking-consciousness  of  every  Culture  allows  of  two  ways  of  inwardness, 
that  in  which  contemplative  feeling  spreads  into  understanding,  and  that  in 
which  the  reverse  takes  place.  The  Magian  contemplation  is  called  by  Spinoza 
“intellectual  love  of  God,”  and  by  his  Sufist  contemporaries  in  Asia  “extinction 
in  God”  QmahyJ)'^  it  may  be  intensified  to  the  Magian  ecstasy  that  was  vouch- 
safed to  Plotinus  several  times,  and  to  his  pupil  Porphyry  once  in  old  age.  The 
other  side,  the  rabbinical  dialectic,  appears  in  Spinoza  as  geometrical  method 
and  in  the  Afabian-Jewish  “Late”  philosophy  in  general  as  Kalaam.  Both, 
however,  rest  upon  the  fact  that  there  in  Magian  there  is  no  individual-ego,  but 
a single  Pneuma  present  simultaneously  in  each  and  all  of  the  elect,  which  is 
likewise  Truth.  It  cannot  be  too  strongly  emphasized  that  the  resultant  root- 
idea  of  the  is  much  more  than  a concept  or  notion,  that  it  can  be  a lived 
experience  of  even  overwhelming  force,  and  that  all  community  of  the  Magian 
kind  rests  upon  it  and,  as  doing  so,  is  removed  from  community  in  any  other 
Culture.  “The  mystic  Community  of  Islam  extends  from  the  here  into  the 
beyond;  it  reaches  beyond  the  grave,  in  that  it  comprises  the  dead  Moslems 
of  earlier  generations,  nay,  even  the  righteous  of  the  times  before  Islam.  The 
Moslem  feels  himself  bound  up  in  one  unity  with  them  all.  They  help  him,  and 
he,  too,  can  in  turn  increase  their  beatitude  by  the  application  of  his  own 

^ The  period  at  whichjt  was  writtca  coffcsponds  to  our  Carolingian.  Whether  the  latter  really 
brought  forth  any  poetry  of  like  rank  we  do  not  know,  but  that  it  may  possibly  have  done  so  is 
shown  by  creations  like  the  Voluspa,  MuspilH,  the  Heliand,  and  the  universe  conceived  by  John 
Scotus  Erigcna. 

® See,  for  example,  Bcrthoict  KMlmrguch.  Israels^  p.  242.. 


THE  MAGI  AN  SOUL  ^43 

merit/’  ^ The  same,  precisely,  was  what  the  Christians  and  the  Syncretists 
of  the  Pseudomorphosis  meant  when  they  used  the  words  Polis  md  Civitas 
these  words,  which  had  formerly  implied  a sum  of  bodies,  now  denoted  a con- 
sensus of  fellow  believers.  Augustine’s  famous  Civitas  Dei  was  neither  a Clas- 
sical Polls  nor  a Western  Church,  but  a unity  of  believers,  blessed,  and  angels, 
exactly  as  were  the  communes  of  Mithras,  of  Islam,  of  Manichasism,  and  of 
Persia.  As  the  community  was  based  upon  consensus,  it  was  in  spiritual  things 
infallible.  **My  people,”  said  Mohammed,  “can  never  agree  in  an  error,”  and 
the  same  is  premised  in  Augustine’s  State  of  God.  With  him  there  was  not  and 
could  not  be  any  question  of  an  infallible  Papal  ego  or  of  any  other  sort  of 
authority  to  settle  dogmatic  truths;  that  would  completely  destroy  the  Magian 
concept  of  the  Consensus.  And  the  same  applied  in  this  Culture  generally  — 
not  only  to  dogma,  but  also  to  law  ^ and  to  the  State.  The  Islamic  community, 
like  that  of  Porphyry  and  that  of  Augustine,  embraces  the  whole  of  the  world- 
cavern,  the  here  and  the  beyond,  the  orthodox  and  the  good  angels  and  spirits, 
and  within  this  community  the  State  only  formed  a smaller  miit  of  the  visible  side^ 
a unit,  therefore,  of  which  the  operations  were  governed  by  the  major  whole. 
In  the  Magian  world,  consequently,  the  separation  of  politics  and  religion  is 
theoretically  impossible  and  nonsensical,  whereas  in  the  Faustian  Culture  the 
battle  of  Church  and  State  is  inherent  in  the  very  conceptions  — logical,  neces^ 
sary,  unending.  In  the  Magian,  civil  and  ecclesiastical  law  are  simply  identical. 
Side  by  side  with  the  Emperor  of  Constantinople  stood  the  Patriarch,  by  the 
Shah  was  the  Zarathustratema,  by  the  Exilarch  the  Gaon,  by  the  Caliph  the 
Sheikh-ul-Islam,  at  once  superiors  and  subjects.  There  is  not  in  this  the  slightest 
afhnity  to  the  Gothic  relation  of  Emperor  and  Pope;  equally,  all  such  ideas  were 
alien  to  the  Classical  world.  In  the  constitution  of  Diocletian  this  Magian 
embedding  of  the  State  in  the  community  of  the  faithful  was  for  the  first  time 
actualized,  and  by  Constantine  it  was  carried  into  full  effect.  It  has  been 
shown  already  that  State,  Church,  and  Nation  formed  a spiritual  unit  — namely, 
that  part  of  the  orthodox  consensus  which  manifested  itself  in  the  living  man. 
And  hence  for  the  Emperor,  as  ruler  of  the  Faithful  ■—  that  is,  of  that  portion  of 
the  Magian  community  which  God  had  entrusted  to  him  — it  was  a self-evident 
duty  to  conduct  the  Councils  so  as  to  bring  about  the  consensus  of  the  elect. 

' . IV  . . 

^ besides  the  consensus  there  is  another  sort  of  revelation  of  Truth  — 

namely,  the  “Word  of  God,”  in  a perfectly  definite  and  purely  Magian  sense  of 
the  phrase,  which  is  equally  remote  from  Classical  and  from  Western  thought, 
and  has,  in  consequence,  been  the  source  of  innumerable  misunderstandings. 
The  sacred  book  in  which  it  has  become  visibly  evident,  in  which  it  has  been 
captured  by  the  spell  of  a sacred  script,  is  part  of  the  stock  of  every  Magian 
^ Horten,  op.  cit.,  p.  xii.  ® Sec  p.  67  above. 


2.44  ' the  decline  OF  THE  WEST  ' 

religion.’^  In  this  conception  three  Magian  notions  are  interwoven  — each  of 
which,  even  by  itself,  presents  extreme  difficulties  for  us,  while  their  simultane- 
ous separateness  and  oneness  is  simply  inaccessible  to  our  religious  thought, 
often  though  that  thought  has  managed  to  persuade  itself  to  the  contrary. 
These  ideas  are:  God,  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  Word  of  God.  That  which  is 
written  in  the  prologue  of  the  John  Gospel  — "In  the  beginning  was  the  Word, 
and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God”  — had  long  before  come 
to  perfectly  natural  expression  as  something  self-evident  in  the  Persian  ideas  of 
Spenta  Mainyu,^  and  Vohu  Mano,  ^ and  in  corresponding  Jewish  and  Chaldean 
conceptions.  And  it  was  the  kernel  for  which  the  conflicts  of  the  fourth  and 
fifth  centuries  concerning  the  substance  of  Christ  were  fought.  But,  for  Magian 
thought,  truth  is  itself  a substance,^  and  lie  (or  error)  second  substance  — again 
the  same  dualism  that  opposes  light  and  darkness,  life  and  death,  good  and  evil. 
As  substance,  truth  is  identical  now  with  God,  now  with  the  Spirit  of  God, 
now  with  the  Word.  Only  in  the  light  of  this  can  we  comprehend  sayings  like 
"I  am  the  truth  and  the  life”  and  "My  word  is  the  truth,”  sayings  to  be  under- 
stood, as  they  were  meant,  with  reference  to  substance.  Only  so,  too,  can  we 
realize  with  what  eyes  the  religious  man  of  this  Culture  looked  upon  his  sacred 
book:  in  it  the  invisible  truth  has  entered  into  a visible  kind  of  existence,  or, 
in  the  words  of  John  i,  14:  "The  Word  became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.*’ 
According  to  the  Yasna  the  Avesta  was  sent  down  from  heaven,  and  according 
to  the  Talmud  Moses  received  the  Torah  volume  by  volume  from  God.  A 
Magian  revelation  is  a mystical  process  in  which  the  eternal  and  unformed  word 
of  God  — or  the  Godhead  as  Word  — enters  into  a man  in  order  to  assume 
through  him  the  manifest,  sensible  form  of  sounds  and  especially  of  letters. 

Koran  ’ ’ means  ‘ ‘ reading.  ’ ’ Mohammed  in  a vision  saw  in  the  heaven  treasured 
rolls  of  scripture  that  he  (although  he  had  never  learned  how  to  read)  was  able 
to  decipher  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  ” ^ This  is  a form  of  revelation  that  in  the 
Magian  Culture  is  the  rule  and  in  other  Cultures  is  not  even  the  exception,®  but 

^ It  is  almost  unnecessary  to  say  that  in  all  religions  of  the  Germanic  West  the  Bible  stands  in 
a quite  other  relationship  to  the  faith  namely,  in  that  of  a source  in  the  strictly  historical  sense, 
irrespective  of  whether  it  is  taken  as  inspired  and  immune  from  textual  criticism  or  not.  The  rela- 
tion of  Chinese  thought  to  the  canonical  books  is  similar. 

^ The  Holy  Spirit,  different  from  Ahuramazda  and  yet  one  with  him,  opposed  to  the  Evil  (Angra 
Mainyu),. ■ ■ 

® Identified  by  Mani  with  the  Johannine  Logos.  Compare  also  Yasht  13,  31.  Ahuramazda’s 
shining  soul  is  the  Word. 

^ Aktheia  (Truth)  is  generally  employed  in  this  way  in  the  John  Gospel,  and  («  lie)  is  used 
for  Ahriman  in  Persian  cosmology.  Ahriman  is  often  shown  as  though  a servant  of  the 

® Sura  96;  cf.  80,  II  and  85,  2.1,  where  in  connexion  with  another  vision  it  is  said:  “This  is 
a noble  Koran  on  a treasured  tablet. “ The  best  commentary  on  all  this  is  Eduard  Meyer’s  QGe- 
schichte  der  Mormonen^  pp.  70,  et  seq.). 

® Classical  man  receives,  in  states  of  extreme  bodily  excitation,  the  power  of  unconsciously 
predicting  future  events.  But  these  visions  are  completely  unliterary.  The  Classical  Sibylline 
books  (which  have  no  connexion  with  the  later  Christian  works  bearing  that  name)  are  meant  to 
be  nothing  more  than  a collection  of  oracles. 


THE  MAGI  AN  SOUL  145 

it  was  only  from  the  time  of  Cyrus  that  it  began  to  take  shape.  The  old  Israel- 
itish  prophets,  and  no  doubt  Zarathustra  also,  see  and  hear  in  ecstasy  things  that 
afterwards  they  spread  abroad.  The  Deuteronomic  code  (62,1)  was  given  out  as 
having  been  ** found  in  the  Temple,”  which  meant  that  it  was  to  be  taken  as 
the  wisdom  of  the  Father.  The  first  (and  a very  deliberate)  example  of  a 
“ Koran”  is  the  book  of  Ezekiel,  which  the  author  received  in  a thought-out 
vision  from.  God  and  “swallowed”  (iii,  1-3 ).  Here,  expressed  in  the  crudest 
imaginable  form,  is  the  basis  on  which  later  the  idea  and  shape  of  all  apocalyptic 
writing  was  founded.  But  by  degrees  this  substantial  form  of  reception  came  to 
be  one  of  the  requisites  for  any  book  to  be  canonical.  It  was  in  post-Exilic  times 
that  the  idea  arose  of  the  Tables  of  the  Law  received  by  Moses  on  Sinai;  later 
such  an  origin  came  to  be  assumed  for  the  whole  Torah,  and  about  the  Macca- 
bacan  period  for  the  bulk  of  the  Old  Testament.  From  the  Council  of  Jabna 
(about  90  B.c.)  the  whole  word  was  regarded  as  inspired  and  delivered  in  the 
most  literal  sense.  But  the  same  evolution  took  place  in  the  Persian  religion  up 
to  the  sanctification  of  the  Avesta  in  the  third  century,  and  the  same  idea  of  a 
literal  delivery  appears  in  the  second  vision  of  Hermas,  in  the  Apocalypses,  and 
in  the  Chaldean  and  Gnostic  and  Mand^^an  writings;  lastly,  it  underlies,  as  a 
tacit  natural  basis,  all  the  ideas  that  the  Neo-Pythagoreans  and  the  Neo-Pla- 
tonists  formed  of  the  writings  of  their  old  masters.  “Canon”  is  the  technical 
expression  for  the  totality  of  writings  that  are  accepted  by  a religion  as  de- 
livered. It  was  as  canons  in  this  sense  that  the  Hermetic  collection  and  the 
corpus  of  Chaldean  oracles  came  into  being  from  2.00  — the  latter  a sacred  book 
of  the  Neoplatonists  which  alone  was  admitted  by  Proclus,  the  “Father”  of 
this  Church,  to  stand  with  Plato’s 

Originally,  the  young  Jesus-religion,  like  Jesus  himself,  recognized  the 
Jewish  canon.  The  first  Gospels  set  up  no  sort  of  claim  to  be  the  Word  made 
visible.  The  John  Gospel  is  the  first  Christian  writing  of  which  the  evident  purpose  is 
that  of  a Koran,  and  its  unknown  author  is  the  originator  of  the  idea  that  there 
could  be  and  must  be  a Christian  Koran.  The  grave  and  difficult  decision 
whether  the  new  religion  should  break  with  that  which  Jesus  had  believed  in 
clothed  itself  of  deep  necessity  in  the  question  whether  the  Jewish  scriptures 
might  still  be  regarded  as  incarnations  of  the  one  truth.  The  answer  of  the  John 
Gospel  was  tacitly,  and  that  of  Marcion  openly,  no,  but  that  of  the  Fathers  was, 
quite  illogically,  yes. 

It  followed  from  this  metaphysical  conception  of  the  essence  of  a sacred  book 
that  the  expressions  “God  speaks”  and  “the  Scripture  says”  were,  in  a manner 
wholly  alien  to  our  thought,  completely  identical.  To  us  it  is  suggestive  of  the 
Arabian  Nights  that  God  himself  should  be  spellbound  in  these  words  and 
letters  and  could  be  unsealed  and  compelled  to  reveal  the  truth  by  the  adepts 
of  this  magic.  Exegesis  no  less  than  inspiration  and  delivery  is  a process  of 
mystical  under-meaning  (Mark  i,  zx).  Hence  the  reverence  — in  diametrical 


i46  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

opposition  to  the  Classical  feeling  - with  which 

vSe  cared  for,  their  ornamentation  by  every  means  kn°wn  to  the  yonng 
Magian  art,  and  the  appearance  f sentdown. 

the-  <!5.me  aonlies  not  only  to  every  book  ot  tne  ruDic,  out  ^ 
d^ohtTto  the  Gathas  of  the  Avesta  and  even  to  the  then  current  manuscripts 
Spiato  Aristotle^  and  other  authorities  of  the  Pagan  theology.  More  im- 
portant still  is  the  assumption,  traceable  in  every  ^Higion  o^ 

Lelation  or  a secret  meaning  of  the  Scriptures,  preserved  not  by  being  writKn 
down,  but  in  the  memory  of  adepts  and  propagated  orally.  According  to  ^wish 
notil,  Moses  received  at  Sinai  not  only  the  written,  but  also  a secra  oral  Torah 
which  it  was  forbidden  to  commit  to  writing.  “God  foresaw  ^ ^ ' 

mud,  “that  one  day  a time  would  come  when  the  Heathen  would  possess  them- 
selves of  the  Torah  and  would  say  to  Israel;  We,  too,  ° ° ^ 

wiU  the  Lord  say;  ‘Only  he  who  knows  my  secrets  is  my  son.  And  ^hat 
are  the  secrets  of  God?  The  oral  teachings.”  ® The  Talmud,  then,  in  the  form 
in  which  it  is  generally  accessible,  contains  only  a part  of  the  religious  material, 
Tnrrt  is  the  sLe  with  Christian  texts  of  the  early  perioA  It  has  often  been 
observed  « that  Mark  speaks  of  the  Visitation  and  of  the  Resurrection  on  y a 
hits  and  that  John  only  touches  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Paraclete  and  omits 
the  institution  of  the  Lord’s  Supper  entirely.  The  initiates 

meant,  and  the  unbeliever  ought  not  to  know  it.  Later  there  was  a whole 
“Let  discipline”  which  bound  Christians  to  observe  silence  in  the  pre^^ 
of  unbelievers  concerning  the  baptismal  confession  and  other  matters.  W«h 
the  Chaldeans,  Neopythagoreans,  Cynics,  Gnostics,  and  especially  the  sects 
from  Jewish  to  Islamic,  this  tendency  went  to  such  lengths  that  the  greater  par^ 
of  their  secret  doctrines  is  unknown  to  us.  Concerning  the  Word  thus  preserved 
only  in  the  minds  there  was  a consensus  of  silence,  the  more  so  as  each  believer  was 
certain  that  the  other  “ knew.”  We  ourselves,  as  it  is  upon  the  most  important 
things  that  we  are  most  emphatic  and  forthright,  run  the  risk  of  ministerpreting 
Magian  doctrines  through  taking  the  part  that  was  expressed  for  the  whole  that 
existed,  and  the  profane  literal  meaning  of  words  for  their  real  significant j 
Gothic  Christianity  had  no  secrets  and  hence  it  doubly  mistrusted  the  Talmud, 
which  it  rightly  regarded  as  being  only  the  foreground  of  Jewish  doctrine. 

» IVEzra^xiv;  S.  Funk,  Die  Entstelning  ihs  Talmuds,  p.  17;  Hirsch’s  commentary  on  Exodus 
xxi,  X. 

® Funk,  op.  cit.,  p.  86.  _ . ^ 

^ For  example,  Ed.  fs/Lcyct^  Urspr,  u.  Anf.  d.  Chrtst^.^  p.  95. 


THE  MAGI  AN  SOUL  z47 

Pure  Magiao,  too,  is  the  Kabbalah,  which  out  of  numbers,  letter-forms, 
points,  and  strokes,  unfolds  secret  significances,  and  therefore  cannot  but  be  as 
old  as  the  Word  itself  that  was  sent  down  as  Substance.  The  secret  dogma  of 
the  creation  of  the  world  out  of  the  two-and-twenty  letters  of  the  Hebrew 
alphabet,  and  that  of  the  throne-chariot  of  Ezekiel’s  Vision,  are  already  trace- 
able in  Maccabsean  times.  Closely  related  to  this  is  the  allegorical  exegesis  of 
the  sacred  texts.  All  the  tractates  of  the  Mishnah,  all  the  Fathers,  all  the  Alex- 
andrian philosophers  are  full  of  it;  in  Alexandria  the  whole  Classical  mythology 
and  even  Plato  were  treated  in  this  way  and  brought  into  analogy  (Moses  = 
Mus^us)  with  the  Jewish  prophets. 

The  only  strictly  scientific  method  that  an  unalterable  Koran  leaves  open  for 
progressive  opinion  is  that  of  commentary.  As  by  hypothesis  the  “word”  of 
an  authority  cannot  be  improved  upon,  the  only  resource  is  reinterpretation. 
No  one  in  Alexandria  would  ever  have  asserted  that  Plato  was  in  “error”; 
instead,  he  was  glossed  upon.  It  was  done  in  the  strictly  constructed  forms  of 
the  Halakha,  and  the  fixation  of  this  exegesis  in  writing  takes  the  commentary 
shape  that  dominates  all  religious,  philosophical,  and  savant  literatures  of  this 
Culture.  Following  the  procedure  of  the  Gnostics,  the  Fathers  compiled 
written  commentaries  upon  the  Bible,  and  similarly  the  Pehlevi  commentary 
of  the  Zend  appeared  by  the  side  of  the  Avesta,  and  the  Midrash  by  the  side  of 
the  Jewish  canon.  But  the  “Roman”  jurists  of  about  a.b.  loo  and  the  “Late 
Classical”  philosophers  — that  is,  the  Schoolmen  of  the  growing  cult-Church 
— went  just  the  same  way;  the  Apocalypse  of  this  Church,  commented  over 
and  over  again  after  Posidonius,  was  the  Timam  of  Plato.  The  Mishnah  is  one 
vast  commentary  upon  the  Torah.  And  when  the  oldest  exegetes  had  become 
themselves  authorities  and  their  writings  Korans,  commentaries  were  written 
upon  commentaries,  as  by  Simplicius,  the  last  Platonist,  in  the  West,  by  the 
Amoraim,  who  added  the  Gemara  to  the  Mishnah  in  the  East,  and  by  the 
jurists  who  compiled  the  Imperial  Constitutions  into  the  Digests  at  Byzantium. 

This  method,  which  fictitiously  refers  back  every  saying  to  an  immediate 
inspired  delivery,  was  brought  to  its  keenest  edge  in  the  Talmudic  and  the 
Islamic  theologies.  A new  Halakha  or  a Hadith  is  only  valid  when  it  can  be 
referred  through  an  unbroken  chain  of  guarantors  back  to  Moses  or  Moham- 
med.^ The  solemn  formula  for  this  in  Jerusalem  was  “Let  it  come  over  me  1 So 
have  I heard  it  from  my  teacher.’*  ^ In  the  Zend  the  citation  of  the  chain  of 
warranty  is  the  rule,  and  Irenasus  justifies  his  theology  by  the  fact  that  a chain 
goes  back  from  him  through  Polycarp  to  the  primitive  Community.  Into  the 
Early  Christian  literature  this  Halakha-form  entered  so  self-evidently  that  no 

^ In  the  West,  Pkro,  Aristotle,  and  above  all  Pythagoras  were  regarded  as  prophets  in  this 
sense.  What  could  be  referred  back  to  them,  was  valid.  For  this  reason  the  succession  of  the  heads 
of  the  schools  became  more  and  more  importaut,  and  often  more  work  was  done  in  establishing  — ' 
or  inventing  — them  than  was  done  upon  the  history  of  the  doctrine  itself. 

2 Fromer,  Dff  p.  190. 


2.48  ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

one  remarked  it  for  what  it  was.  Apart  altogether  from  the  constant  references 
to  the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  it  appears  in  the  superscription  of  the  four  Gospels 
according  to*'  Mark),  each  of  which  had  thus  to  present  its  warrant  if  authority 
was  to  be  claimed  for  the  words  of  the  Lord  that  it  presented.^  This  established 
the  chain  back  to  the  Truth  that  was  incarnate  in  Jesus,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
exaggerate  the  intense  reality  of  this  in  the  world-idea  of  an  Augustine  or  a 
Jerome.  This  is  the  basis  of  the  practice,  which  spread  even  more  widely  from 
the  time  of  Alexander  onwards,  of  providing  religious  and  philosophical  writ- 
ings with  names,^  like  Enoch,  Solomon,  Ezra,  Hermes,  Pythagoras  guarantors 
and  vessels  of  divine  wisdom,  in  whom,  therefore,  the  Word  had  been  made 
Flesh  of  old.  We  still  possess  a number  of  Apocalypses  bearing  the  name  of 
Baruch,  who  was  then  compared  with  Zarathustra,  and  we  can  scarcely  form 
an  idea  of  what  in  the  way  of  literature  circulated  under  the  names  of  Aristotle 
and  Pythagoras.  The  “Theology  of  Aristotle”  was  one  of  the  most  influential 
works  of  Neoplatonism.  And,  lastly,  this  the  metaphysical  presupposition 
for  the  style  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  citation^  which  was  employed  by  Fathers, 
Rabbis,  “Greek”  philosophers,  and  “Roman”  jurists,  and  eventuated  on  the 
one  hand  in  the  Law  of  Valentinian  III,^  and  on  the  other  in  the  elimination 
from  the  Jewish  and  Christian  canons  of  apocryphal  writings  • — a fundamental 
notion,  which  differentiated  the  literary  stock  according  to  difference  o{  substance. 

V 

With  such  researches  to  build  upon,  it  will  become  possible  in  the  future 
to  write  a history  of  the  Magian  group  of  religions.  It  forms  an  inseparable 
unit  of  spirit  and  evolution,  and  let  no  one  imagine  that  any  individual  one  of 
them  can  be  really  comprehended  without  reference  to  the  rest.  Their  birth, 
unfolding,  and  inward  confirmation  occupy  the  period  0-500.  It  corresponds 
exactly  to  the  rise  of  the  Western  religion  from  the  Cluniac  movement  to  the 
Reformation.  A mutual  give-and-take,  a confusingly  rich  blossoming,  ripen- 
ing, transformation  — overlayings,  migrations,  adaptations,  rejections  — 
fill  these  centuries,  without  any  sort  of  dependence  of  one  system  upon  the  others 
being  demonstrable.  But  only  the  forms  and  the  structures  change;  in  the 
depths  it  is  one  and  the  same  spirituality,  and  in  all  the  languages  of  this  world 
of  religions  it  is  always  itself  that  it  brings  to  expression. 

^ We  to-day  confuse  authorship  and  authority,  Arabian  thought  knew  not  the  idea  of  ‘ ‘ intellectual 
property.”  Such  would  have  been  absurd  and  sinful,  for  it  is  the  one  divine  Pneunia  that  selects 
the  individual  as  vessel  and  mouthpiece.  Only  to  that  extent  is  he  the  “author,”  and  it  does  not 
matter  even  whether  he  or  another  actually  writes  down  the  material,  “The  Gospel  according  to 
Mark”  means  that  Mark  vouches  for  the  truth  of  this  evangel. 

^ On  the  pseudonyma  and  anonyma  of  Biblical  apocryphal  literature  the  English  reader  will 
find  much  of  interest  in  three  small  books  (already  referred  to)  of  the  “Home  University”  series- 
Moore,  Literature  of  the  Old  Testaments  Charles,  Between  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments;  and  Bacon, 
The  Making  of  the  New  Testament.  — Tr. 

® See  p.  73.  — Tr. 


THE  MAGI  AN  SOUL  149 

In  the  wide  fealm  of  old-Babylonian  fellahdom  young  peoples  lived.  There 
everything  was  making  ready.  The  first  premonitions  of  the  future  avv^oke 
about  700  B.c.  in  the  prophetic  religions  of  the  Persians,  Jews,  and  Chaldeans. 
An  image  of  creation  of  the  same  kind  that  later  was  to  be  the  preface  of  the 
Torah  showed  itself  in  clear  outlines,  and  with  that  an  orientation,  a direction, 
a goal  of  desire,  was  set.  Something  was  descried  in  the  far  future,  indefinitely 
and  darkly  still,  but  with  a profound  certainty  that  it  would  come.  From  that 
time  Oil  men  lived  with  the  vision  of  this,  with  the  feeling  of  a mission. 

The  second  wave  swelled  up  steeply  in  the  Apocalyptic  currents  after  300. 
Here  it  was  the  Magian  waking-consciousness  that  arose  and  built  itself  a 
metaphysic  of  Last  Things,  based  already  upon  the  prime-symbol  of  the  coming 
Culture,  the  Cavern.  Ideas  of  an  awful  End  of  the  World,  of  the  Last  Judgment, 
of  Resurrection,  Paradise,  and  Hell,  and  with  them  the  grand  thought  of  a 
process  of  salvation  in  which  earth's  destiny  and  man’s  were  one,  burst  forth 
everywhere  — we  cannot  say  what  land  or  people  it  was  that  created  them  — 
mantled  in  wondrous  scenes  and  figures  and  names.  The  Messiah-figure  presents 
itself,  complete  at  one  stroke.  Satan’s  temptation  of  the  Saviour  ^ is  told  as  a 
tale.  But  simultaneously  there  welled  up  a deep  and  ever-increasing  fear  be- 
fore this  certainty  of  an  implacable  — and  imminent  — limit  of  all  happening, 
before  the  moment  in  which  there  would  be  only  Past.  Magian  Time,  the 
'‘hour,”  directedness  under  the  Cavern,  imparted  a new  pulse  to  life  and  a new 
import  to  the  word  “Destiny.”  Man’s  attitude  before  the  Deity  suddenly 
became  completely  different.  In  the  dedicatory  inscription  of  the  great  basilica 
of  Palmyra  (which  was  long  thought  to  be  Christian)  Baal  was  called  the 
good,  the  compassionate,  the  mild;  and  this  feeling  penetrated,  with  the 
worship  of  Rahman,  right  to  southern  Arabia,  It  fills  the  psalms  of  the  Chal- 
deans and  the  teachings  about  the  God-sent  Zarathustra  that  took  the  place  of 
his  teachings  * And  it  stirred  the  Jewry  of  Maccabean  time  — most  of  the  psalms 
were  written  then  — and  all  the  other  communities,  long  forgotten  now,  that 
lay  between  the  Classical  and  the  Indian  worlds. 

The  third  upheaval  came  in  the  time  of  Cassar  and  brought  to  birth  the 
great  religions  of  Salvation.  And  with  this  the  Culture  rose  to  bright  day, 
and  what  followed  continuously  throughout  one  or  two  centuries  was  an 
intensity  of  religious  experience,  both  unsurpassable  and  at  long  last  unbear- 
able. Such  a tension  bordering  upon  the  breaking  point  the  Gothic,  the 
Vedic,  and  every  other  Culture-soul  has  known,  once  and  once  only,  in  its 
young  morning. 

Now  arose  in  the  Persian,  the  Mandasan,  the  Jewish,  the  Christian,  circles 
of  belief,  and  in  that  of  the  Western  Pseudomorphosis  as  well  — just  as  in  the 
Indian,  the  Classical,  and  the  Western  ages  of  Chivalry  — the  Grand  Myth. 
In  this  Arabian  Culture  religious  and  national  heroism  are  no  more  distinctly 
^ Vendidad  19,  i;  here  it  is  Zarathustra  who  is  tempted. 


2.50  / THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

separable  than  nation,  church,  and  state,  or  sacred  and  secular  law.  The 
prophet  merges  with  the  fighter,  and  the  story  of  a great  Sufferer  rises  to  the 
rank  of  a national  epic.  The  powers  of  light  and  darkness,  fabulous  beings, 
angels  and  devils,  Satan  and  the  good  spirits  wrestle  together;  all  nature  is  a 
battle-ground  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  its  annihilation.  Down 
below  in  the  world  of  mankind  are  enacted  the  adventures  and  sufferings  of  the 
heralds,  the  heroes,  and  the  martyrs  of  religion.  Every  nation,  in  the  sense  of 
the  word  attaching  to  this  Culture,  possessed  its  heroic  saga.  In  the  East  the 
life  of  the  Persian  prophet  inspired  an  epic  poetry  of  grand  outlines.  At  his 
birth  the  Zarathustra-laughter  pealed  through  the  heavens,  and  all  nature 
echoed  it.  In  the  West  the  suffering  of  Jesus,  ever  broadening  and  developing, 
became  the  veritable  epic  of  the  Christian  nation^  and  by  its  side  there  grew  up  a 
chain  of  legends  of  his  childhood  which  in  the  end  fructified  a whole  genre 
of  poetry.  The  figure  of  the  Mother  of  God  and  the  deeds  of  the  Apostles  be- 
came, like  the  stories  of  the  Western  Crusade-heroes,  the  centre  of  extended 
romances  (Acts  of  Thomas,  Pseudo-Clementines)  which  in  the  second  century 
sprang  up  everywhere  from  the  Nile  to  the  Tigris.  In  the  Jewish  Haggada  and  in 
the  Targums  is  brought  together  a rich  measure  of  legends  about  Saul,  David,  the 
Patriarchs,  and  the  great  Tannaim,  like  Schuda  and  Akiba,^  and  the  insatia- 
ble fancy  of  the  age  seized  also  upon  what  it  could  reach  of  the  Late-Classical  cult- 
legends  and  founder-stories  (lives  of  Pythagoras,  Hermes,  Apollonius  of  Tyana). 

With  the  end  of  the  second  century  the  sounds  of  this  exaltation  die  away. 
The  flowering  of  epic  poetry  is  past,  and  the  mystical  penetration  and  dogmatic 
analysis  of  the  religious  material  begin.  The  doctrines  of  the  new  Churches 
are  brought  into  theological  systems.  Heroism  yields  to  Scholasticism,  poetry 
to  thought,  the  seer  and  seeker  to  the  priest.  The  early  Scholasticism  which 
ends  about  xoo  (as  the  Western  about  izoo)  comprises  the  whole  Gnosis  — 
in  the  very  broadest  sense,  the  great  Contemplation  • — the  author  of  the  John 
Gospel,  Valentinus,  Bardesanes,  and  Marcion,  the  Apologists  and  the  early 
Fathers,  up  to  Irenseus  and  Tertullian,  the  last  Tannaim  up  to  Rabbi  Jehuda, 
the  completer  of  the  Mishna,  the  Neopythagoreans  and  Hermetics  of  Alexandria. 
All  this  corresponds  with,  in  the  West,  the  School  of  Chartres,  Anselm,  Joachim 
of  Floris,  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  Hugo  de  St.  Victor.  Full  Scholasticism  begins 
with  Neoplatonism,  with  Clement  and  Origen,  the  first  Amoraim,  and  the 
creators  of  the  newer  Avesta  under  Ardeshir  (zz6“Z4i)  and  Sapor  I,  the  Maz- 
daist  high-priest  Tanvasar  above  all.  Simultaneously  a higher  religiousness 
begins  to  separate  from  the  peasant’s  piety  of  the  countryside,  which  still 
lingered  in  the  apocalyptic  disposition,  and  thenceforth  maintained  itself  almost 
unaltered  under  various  names  right  into  the  fellahdom  of  the  Turkish  age, 
while  in  the  urban  and  more  intellectual  upper  world  the  Persian,  Jewish,  and 
Christian  community  was  absorbed  by  that  of  Islam. 

^ M.  J.  ben  Gorion,  Du  Sagm  der  Juden  (1913). 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  151 

Slowly  and  steadily  now  the  great  Churches  moved  to  fulfilment.  It  had 
been  decided  — the  most  important  religious  result  of  the  second  century  — 
that  the  outcome  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus  was  not  to  be  a transformation  of 
Judaism,  but  a new  Church,  which  took  its  way  westward  while  Judaism, 
without  loss  of  inward  strength,  turned  itself  to  the  East.  To  the  third  century 
belong  the  great  mental  structures  of  theology.  A modus  vivmdi  with  historical 
actuality  had  been  reached,  the  end  of  the  world  had  receded  into  the  distance, 
and  a new  dogmatic  grew  up  to  explain  the  new  world-picture.  The  arrival  of 
mature  Scholasticism  presupposes  faith  in  the  duration  of  the  doctrines  that  it 
sets  itself  to  establish. 

Viewing  the  results  of  their  efforts,  we  find  that  the  Aramaean  motherland 
developed  its  forms  in  three  directions.  In  the  East,  out  of  the  Zoroastrian 
religion  of  Achasmenid  times  and  the  remains  of  its  sacred  literature,  there 
formed  itself  the  Mazdaist  Church,  with  a strict  hierarchy  and  laborious  ritual, 
with  sacraments,  mass,  and  confession  Qpatet).  As  mentioned  above,  Tanvasar 
made  a beginning  with  the  collection  and  ordering  of  the  new  A vesta;  under 
Sapor  I (as  contemporaneously  in  the  Talmud)  the  profane  texts  of  medicine, 
law,  and  astronomy  were  added;  and  the  rounding-off  was  the  work  of  the 
Church  magnate  Mahraspand  under  Sapor  II  (309-379).  The  immediate  accre- 
tion of  a commentary  in  Pehlevi  was  only  what  was  to  be  expected  in  the  Magian 
Culture.  The  new  Avesta,  like  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  Bibles,  was  a 
canon  of  separate  writings,  and  we  learn  that  amongst  the  Nasks  (originally 
twenty-one)  now  lost  there  was  a gospel  of  Zarathustra,  the  conversion- 
story  of  Vishtaspa,  a Genesis,  a law-book,  and  a genealogical  book  with  trees 
from  the  Creation  to  the  Persian  kings,  while  the  Vendidad,  which  Geldner 
calls  the  Leviticus  of  the  Persians,  was  — most  significantly  — preserved 
complete. 

A new  religious  founder  appeared  in  2.^2.,  in  the  reign  of  Sapor  I,  This  was 
Mani,  who,  rejecting  “redeemerless*'  Judaism  and  Hellenism,  knit  together  the 
whole  mass  of  Magian  religions  in  one  of  the  most  powerful  theological  cre- 
ations of  all  times  — for  which  in  zjS  the  Mazdaist  priesthood  crucified  him. 
Equipped  by  his  father  (who  quite  late  in  life  abandoned  his  family  to  enter  a 
Mandasan  order)  with  all  the  knowledge  of  the  period,  he  unified  the  basic 
ideas  of  the  Chaldeans  and  Persians  with  those  of  Johannine,  Eastern,  Chris- 
tianity — a task  which  had  been  attempted  before  in  the  Christian-Persian 
Gnosis  of  Bardesanes,  but  without  any  idea  of  founding  a new  church.^  He 

^ It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  must  through  oral  tradition  have  had  a very  accurate 
Icnowledgc  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  John  Gospel.  Even  Bardesanes  (d.  2.54),  and  the 
“Acts  of  St.  Thomas”  that  originated  in  his  circle,  are  very  far  removed  indeed  from  Pauline  doc- 
trines, an  alienation  that  in  Mani  rose  to  downright  hostility  and  to  the  historical  Jesus’s  being 
described  as  an  evil  demon.  We  obtain  here  a glimpse  into  the  essence  of  the  almost  subterranean 
Christianity  of  the  East,  which  was  ignored  by  the  Greek-writing  churches  of  the  Pscudomor- 
phosis  and  for  that  reason  has  hitherto  escaped  the  attention  of  Church  history.  But  Marcion  and 
Montanus  also  came  from  eastern  Asia  Minor;  here  originated  the  Naasene  book,  basically  Per- 


ijz  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

conceived  of  the  mystical  figures  of  the  Johannine  Logos  (for  him  identical 
with  the  Persian  Vohu  Mano),  the  Zarathustra  of  the  Avesta  legends,  and  the 
Buddha  of  the  late  texts  as  divine  Emanations,  and  himself  he  proclaimed  to  be 
the  Paraclete  of  the  John  Gospel  and  the  Saoshyant  of  the  Persians.  As  we  now 
know,  thanks  to  the  Turfan  discoveries  which  included  parts  of  Manias  works 
(till  then  completely  lost),  the  Church-language  of  the  Mazdaists,  Manich^ans, 
and  Nestorians  was  — independently  of  the  current  languages  Pehlevi. 

In  the  West  the  two  cult-Churches  developed  (in  Greek  0 a theology  that 
was  not  only  cognate  with  this,  but  to  a great  extent  identical  with  it.  In  the 
time  of  Mani  began  the  theological  fusion  of  the  Aramxan-Chaldean  sun- 
religion  and  the  Aram^an-Persian  Mithras  cult  into  one  system,  whose  first 
great  "Father”  was  lamblichus  (c.  300) the  contemporary  of  Athanasius, 
but  also  of  Diocletian,  the  Emperor  who  in  195  made  Mithras  the  God  of  a 
henotheistic  State-religion.  Spiritually,  at  any  rate,  its  priests  were  in  nowise 
distinguishable  from  those  of  Christianity.  Proclus  (he,  too,  a true  Father  ”) 
received  in  dreams  elucidations  of  a difficult  text-passage;  to  him  the  Timaus 
and  the  Chaldean  oracles  were  canonical,  and  he  would  gladly  have  seen  all 
other  writings  of  the  philosophers  destroyed.  His  hymns,  tokens  of  the  lacera- 
tions of  a true  eremite,  implore  Helios  and  other  helpers  to  protect  him  against 
evil  spirits.  Hieroeles  wrote  a moral  breviary  for  the  believers  of  the  Neo- 
pythagorean  community,  which  it  needs  a keen  eye  to  distinguish  from  Chris- 
tian work-  Bishop  Synesius  was  a prince-prelate  of  Neoplatonism  before 
becoming  one  of  Christianity  — and  the  change  did  not  involve  an  act  of 
conversion;  he  kept  his  theology  and  only  altered  its  names.  It  was  possible 
for  the  Neoplatonist  Asclepiades  to  write  a great  work  on  the  likeness  of  all 
theologies.  We  possess  Pagan  gospels  and  hagiologies  as  well  as  Christian, 
Apollonius  wrote  the  life  of  Pythagoras,  Marinus  that  of  Proclus,  Damascius 
that  of  Isidore;  and  there  is  not  the  slightest  difference  between  these  works, 
which  begin  and  end  with  prayers,  and  the  Christian  Acts  of  the  Martyrs. 
Porphyry  describes  faith,  love,  hope,  and  truth  as  the  four  divine  elements. 

Between  these  Churches  of  the  East  and  the  West  we  see,  looking  south 
from  Edessa,  the  Talmudic  Church  (the  "Synagogue”)  with  Aramaic  as  its 
written  language.  Against  these  great  and  firm  foundations  Jewish-Christians 
(such  as  Ebionites  and  Elkazites),  Mandasans,  and  likewise  Chaldeans  (unless 
we  regard  Manichasism  as  a reconstruction  of  that  religion)  were  unable  to 
hold  their  own.  Breaking  down  into  numberless  sects,  they  either  faded  out 

sian,  but  overlaid  first  with  Judaism  and  then  with  Christianity;  and  further  east,  probably  in  the 
Matthew  monastery  of  Mosul,  Aphrahat  wrote,  about  340,  those  strange  epistles  whose  Chris- 
tianity the  Western  development  from  Irenasus  to  Athanasius  left  wholly  unaffected.  The  history 
of  Nestorian  Christianity,  in  fact,  was  already  beginning  in  the  second  century. 

^ For  the  later  writings  of  (for  example)  Tcrtullian  and  Augustine  remained  wholly  without 
effect  save  in  so  far  as  they  were  translated.  In  Home  itself  even,  Greek  was  the  true  language  oi 
the  Church. 


THE  MAGI  AN  SOUL  , 153 

1:0^  the.  shadow  of  the  great  Churches  or  were  absorbed  in  their  structure  as  the 
last  Marcionites  and  Montanists  were  absorbed,  into  Manichaeisin.  B7  about 
300,  outside  the  Pagan,  Christian,  Persian,  Jewish,  and  Manichaean  Churches 
no  i'lnportant  Magian  religions  remained  in  being. 

VI 

Along  with  this  ripe  Scholasticism,  there  set  in  also,  from  xoo,  the  eiOFort  to 
identify  the  visMe  community,  as  its  organization  became  ever  stricter,  with  the 
organism  of  the  State,  This  followed  of  necessity  from  the  world-feeling  of 
Magian  man,  and  in  turn  it  led  to  the  transformation  of  the  rulers  into  caliphs 

— lords  of  a creed-society  far  more  than  of  domains  — to  the  idea  of  orthodoxy 
as  the  premiss  of  real  citizenship;  to  the  duty  of  persecuting  false  religions 
(the  ‘*Holy  War”  of  Islam  is  as  old  as  the  Culture  itself,  and  the  first  centuries 
were  full  of  it);  and  to  a special  regime  within  the  State  of  unbelievers  ~ 
just  tolerated  and  under  laws  and  governance  of  their  own  ^ (for  the  law  God 
had  given  was  not  for  heretics)  — and,  with  it,  the  ghetto  manner  of  living. 

First,  Osrhoene,  in  the  centre  of  the  Aramaean  landscape,  adopted  Christianity 
as  the  State  religion  about  zoo.  Then  Mazdaism  assumed  the  same  position  in 
the  Sassanid  Empire  (zz6)  while  under  Aurelian  (d.  175)  and  above  all  Dio- 
cletian (1.95)  Syncretism  as  a compound  of  the  Divus,  Sol,  and  Mithras  cults 
became  the  state  religion  of  the  Roman  Imperium.  Constantine  in  31Z,  King 
Trdat  of  Armenia  about  3Z1,  and  King  Mirian  of  Georgia  a few  years  later, 
went  over  to  Christianity.  In  the  far  South,  Saba  must  already  have  become 
Christian  in  the  third  century,  Axum  in  the  fourth;  on  the  other  hand,  simul- 
taneously with  these,  the  Himaryite  State  became  Jewish,  and  there  was  one 
more  effort,  that  of  Julian,  to  bring  back  the  Pagan  Church  to  supremacy. 

In  opposition  to  this  — likewise  in  all  the  religions  of  this  Culture  — we 
find  the  spread  of  Monasticism,  with  its  radical  aversion  from  State,  history, 
and  actuality  in  general.  For  after  all  the  conflict  of  being  and  waking-being 

— that  is,  of  politics  and  religion,  of  history  and  nature  — could  not  be  com- 
pletely mastered  by  the  form  of  the  Magian  Church  and  its  identification  with 
State  and  nation.  Race  breaks  forth  into  life  in  these  mind-creations  and  over- 
powers the  divine,  precisely  because  the  latter  has  absorbed  the  worldly  into 
itself.  But  here  there  was  no  conflict  of  Church  and  State  as  in  the  Gothic  age, 
and  consequently  the  split  in  the  nation  was  between  the  worldly-pious  and  the 
ascetics.  A Magian  religion  relates  exclusively  to  the  divine  spark,  the  Pneuma, 
in  the  man,  that  which  he  shares  with  the  invisible  community  of  the  faithful 
and  blessed  spirits.  The  rest  of  the  man  belongs  to  Evil  and  Darkness.  But  in 
the  man  it  is  the  divine  that  must  rule,  overcoming,  suppressing,  destroying 
the  other.  In  this  Culture  the  askete  is  not  only  the  veritable  priest  — the 
secular  priest,  as  to-day  in  Russia,  is  never  really  respected,  and  mostly  he  is 

1 See  177.  Tr. 


154  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

ailowed  to  marry  — but,  what  is  more,  he  is  the  true  man  of  piety.  Outside 
monasticism  it  was  simply  not  possible  to  fulfil  the  demands  of  religion,  and 
consequently  communities  of  repentance,  monasteries,  and  convents  assume 
quite  early  a position  that,  for  metaphysical  reasons,  they  could  never  have  had 
in  India  or  China  — let  alone  in  the  West,  where  the  Orders  were  working  and 
fighting  — that  is,  dynamic  — units. ^ Consequently,  we  must  not  regard  the 
people  of  the  Magian  world  as  divided  into  the  '‘world’’  and  the  “cloister” 
as  two  definitely  separate  modes  of  life,  with  equal  possibilities  of  fulfilling  all 
the  demands  of  religion.  Every  pious  person  was  a monk  in  some  sottJ  Be- 
tween world  and  cloister  there  was  no  opposition,  but  only  a difference  of  Jegree. 
Magian  churches  and  orders  are  homogeneous  communities  which  are  only 
to  be  distinguished  from  one  another  by  extent.  The  community  of  Peter  was 
an  Order,  that  of  Paul  a Church,  while  the  Mithras  religion  is  at  once  almost 
too  wide  for  the  one  designation  and  too  narrow  for  the  other. 

B^ery  Magian  Church  is  itself  an  Order  and  it  was  only  in  respect  of  human 
weakness  that  there  were  stages  and  grades  of  askesis,  and  these  not  ordered, 
but  only  permitted,  as  among  the  Marcionites  and  the  Manichxans  (eketi^ 
auditores').  And,  in  truth,  a Magian  nation  is  nothing  but  the  sum,  the  order  of 
all  the  orders,  which,  constituted  in  smaller  and  smaller,  stricter  and  stricter 
groups,  come  out  finally  in  the  eremites,  dervishes,  and  stylites,  in  whom 
nothing  more  is  of  the  world,  whose  waking-consciousness  now  belongs  only 
to  the  Pneuma.  Setting  aside  the  prophetic  religions  — out  of  which,  and 
between  which,  the  excitation  of  Apocalypse  generated  numerous  order-like 
communities  — the  two  cult-Churches  of  the  West  produced  unnumbered 
monks,  friars,  and  orders,  distinguishable  from  one  another  in  the  end  only  by 
the  name  of  the  Deity  upon  whom  they  called.  All  observed  fasting,  prayer, 
celibacy,  poverty.  It  is  very  doubtful  which  of  the  two  Churches  in  300  was 
the  more  ascetic  in  its  tendency.  The  Neoplatonist  monk  Sarapion  went 
into  the  desert  in  order  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  studying  the  hymns  of 
Orpheus.  Damascius,  guided  by  a dream,  withdrew  into  a noisome  cave  in 
order  to  pray  continuously  to  Cybele.^  The  schools  of  philosophy  were  nothing 
but  ascetic  orders;  the  Neopythagoreans  stood  close  to  the  Jewish  Essenes; 
the  Mithras  cult,  a true  order,  admitted  only  men  to  its  communion  and  its 
fraternities;  the  Emperor  Julian  had  the  intention  of  endowing  pagan  monas- 
teries. The  Mandsean  religion  seems  to  have  been  a group  of  order-communities 
of  varying  rigour;  amongst  them  was  that  of  John  the  Baptist.  Christian 
monasticism  did  not  begin  with  Pacbomius  (3x0);  he  was  merely  the  builder  of 

^ The  Faustian  monk  represses  his  evil  will,  the  Magian  the  evil  substance  in  himself.  Only 
the  latter  is  dualistic. 

2 The  purity-  and  food-laws  of  the  Talmud  and  the  Avesta  cut  far  deeper  into  everyday  life 
than,  for  example,  the  Benedictine  rule. 

® Asmus,  “Damaskios”  (VUlos.  Bthl.,  115  (1911).  Christian  anchoritism  is  later  thm.  pagan: 
Rcitzenstcin,  Athanasius  Werk  uherdas  Leben  ies  Antonins**  (Sit^.  Heid.  Ak,  (1914),  VIII,  la). 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  X55 

the  first  cloister.  The  moYcment  began  with  the  original  community  in 
Jerusalem  itself.  The  Gospel  of  Matthew  and  almost  ail  Acts  of  the  Apostles  ’ ’ 
testify  to  rigorously  ascetic  sentiment.^  The  Persian  and  Nestorian  Churches 
developed  the  monastic  idea  further,  and  finally  Islam  assimilated  it  to  the  full. 
To  this  day  Oriental  piety  is  dominated  by  the  Moslem  Orders  and  Brotherhoods, 
And  Jewry  followed  the  same  line  of  evolution,  from  the  Karasi  ^ (Qaraites) 
of  the  eighth  century  to  the  Polish  Hasidim  of  the  eighteenth,^ 

Christianity,  which  even  in  the  second  century  was  hardly  more  than  an 
extended  Order,  and  whose  public  influence  was  out  of  all  proportion  to  the 
number  of  its  adherents,  grew  suddenly  vast  about  the  year  Z50.  This  is  the 
epochal  moment  in  which  the  last  city-cults  of  the  Classical  effaced  themselves 
before,  mt  Christimitj^  but  the  mw-hom  Fagan  Church.  The  records  of  the  Fratres 
KtyzIcs  in  Rome  break  off  in  141,  and  the  last  cult-inscriptions  at  Olympia  arc 
of  z65  . At  the  same  time,  the  cumulation  of  the  most  diverse  priestly  char- 
acters in  one  man  became  customary,^  implying  that  these  usages  were  felt  no 
longer  as  specific,  but  as  usages  of  one  single  religion.  And  this  religion  set  out 
to  convert^  spreading  itself  far  and  wide  over  the  lands  of  the  Hellenistic-Roman 
stock.  The  Christian  religion,  on  the  other  hand,  was  alone  in  spreading 
(c.  300)  over  the  great  Arabian  field.  And  for  that  very  reason  it  was  inevitable 
that  inner  contradiction  should  now  be  set  up  in  it.  Due,  not  now  to  the  spirit- 
ual dispositions  of  particular  men,  but  to  the  spirit  of  the  particular  landscapes, 
these  contradictions  led  to  the  break-up  of  Ghristianity  into  several  religions  — - 
and  for  ever. 

The  controversy  concerning  the  nature  of  Christ  was  the  issue  on  which  this 
conflict  came  up  for  decision.  The  matter  in  dispute  was  just  those  problems  oi 
substance  which  in  the  same  form  and  with  the  same  tendency  fill  the  thoughts 
of  all  other  Magian  theologies.  Neoplatonic  Scholasticism,  Porphyry,  lambli- 
chus,  and  above  all  Proclus  treated  it  in  a Western  formulation,  by  modes  of 
thought  closely  akin  to  Philo's  and  even  to  PauFs.  The  relation  between  the 
Primary  One,  Nus,  Logos,  the  Father,  and  the  Mediator  was  considered  with 
reference  to  the  substantial.  Was  the  process  thereof  one  of  emanation,  of 
partition,  or  of  pervasion?  Was  one  contained  in  the  other,  are  they  identical. 
Of  mutually  exclusive?  Was  the  Triad  at  the  same  time  a Monad?  In  the  East  a 
different  constitution  of  the  problem  is  evidenced  already  in  the  premisses  of  the 
John  Gospel  and  the  Bardesanian  Gnosis:  the  relation  of  Ahuramazda  to  the 
Holy  Spirit  (Spenta  Mainyu)  and  the  nature  of  Vohu  Mano  gave  plenty  of 

^ Even  to  the  point  indicated  in  Matt,  xix,  ix,  which  Origen  followed  to  the  letter. 

2 Sec  Bncy.  BriP.,  XI  ed,,  article  “Qaraites.”  The  outlook  of  these  Protestants  so  resembled  that 
of  the  Western  Protestants  that  their  name  was  used  as  a term  of  contempt  for  the  latter  by  the  Catho- 
lics, and  not  greatly  resented.  It  is  significant  also  that  this  movement  in  Jewry  almost  coincided 
in  date  with  the  vaster  Reformation  of  Islam. Tf. 

® The  followers  of  Baal  Shem  above  mentioned  (p.  xi8)  not  to  be  confused  with  the  Hasidin? 
or  Assideans  of  the  second  century  — Tr. 

^ Wissowa,  Relipon  und  Kulpurs  p.  493;  Gcffcken  pp.  4,  144. 


2.56  the  decline  of  the  WEST 

occupation  to  the  Avestan“  fathers";  and  it  was  just  at  the  time  of  the  decisive 
Councils  of  Ephesus  and  Chalcedon  that  we  find  the  temporary  triumph  of 
Zrvanism  (438-457),  with  its  primacy  of  the  divine  world-course  (Zrvan  as 
historic  Time)  over  the  divine  substances  marking  a peak  of  dogmatic  battle. 
Later,  Islam  took  up  the  whole  subject  over  again  and  sought  to  solve  it  in 
relation  to  the  nature  (Wesenheit)  of  Mohammed  and  the  Koran.  The  problem 
had  been  there,  ever  since  a Magian  mankind  had  come  into  being  — very 
much  as  the  specifically  Western  will-problem,  our  counterpart  to  the  substance- 
problem,  was  posed  in  the  beginnings  of  Faustian  thought.  There  is  no  need 
to  look  for  these  problems;  they  are  there  as  soon  as  the  Culture  thinks,  they 
are  the  fundamental  form  of  its  thought,  and  come  to  the  front,  uncalled-for 
and  sometimes  not  even  perceived,  in  all  its  studies. 

But  the  three  Christian  solutions  predetermined  by  the  three  landscapes  of 
East,  West,  and  South  were  all  present  from  the  first,  implicit  already  in  the 
main  tendencies  of  Gnosticism,  which  we  may  indicate  by  the  names  of  Bar- 
desanes,  Basilides,  and  Valentinus.  Their  meeting-point  was  Edcssa,  where 
the  streets  rang  with  the  battle-cries  of  the  Ncstorians  against  the  victors  of 
Ephesus  and,  anon,  with  the  €&  shout  of  the  Monophysites,  demanding 
that  Bishop  Ibas  should  be  thrown  to  the  wild  beasts  of  the  circus. 

The  great  question  was  formulated  by  Athanasius,  whose  intellectual  origins 
lay  in  the  Pseudomorphosis  and  who  had  many  affinities  with  his  Pagan  con- 
temporary lamblichus.  Against  Arius,  who  saw  in  Christ  a demigod,  merely 
like  in  substance  to  the  Father,  he  maintained  that  Father  and  Son  were  of  the 
substance  (^eoTT/s)  which  in  Christ  had  assumed  a human  “The 

Word  became  Flesh"  — this  formula  of  the  West  depends  upon  visible  facts  of 
the  cuit-Churches,  and  the  understanding  of  the  Word  upon  constant  contempla- 
tion of  the  picturable.  Here  in  the  iconodule  West,  where  in  these  very  times 
lamblichus  wrote  his  book  concerning  God-statues  in  which  the  divine  was 
substantially  present  and  worked  miracles,^  the  abstraction  of  the  Triunity 
was  always  effectively  accompanied  by  the  sensuous-human  relation  of  Mother 
and  Son,  and  it  is  the  latter  which  it  is  impossible  to  eliminate  from  the  thought- 
processes  of  Athanasius. 

With  the  recognition  of  the  homoousia  of  Father  and  Son  the  real  problem 
was  for  the  first  time  posed  — namely,  the  attitude  of  the  Magian  dualism  to 
the  historical  phenomenon  of  the  Son  himself.  In  the  world-cavern  there  was 
divine  and  human  substance,  in  man  a part  in  divine  Pneuma  and  the  individual 
soul  somehow  related  to  the  “flesh,"  But  what  of  Christ? 

It  was  a decisive  factor  — one  of  the  results  of  Actium  — that  the  contest 
was  fought  out  in  the  Greek  tongue  and  in  the  territory  of  the  Pseudomorphosis 
— that  is,  under  the  full  influence  of  the  “Caliph"  of  the  Western  Church. 

^ This  is  the  metaphysical  basis  also  of  the  Christian  image- worship,  which  presently  set  in 
and  of  the  appearance  of  wonder-working  pictures  of  Mary  and  the  Saints. 


THE  MAGI  AN  SOUL  X57 

Constantine  had  even  been  the  convener  and  president  of  the  Council  of  Nic^a, 
where  the  doctrine  of  Athanasius  carried  the  day.  In  the  East,  with  its  Aramaic 
speech  and  thought,  these  doings  were  (as  we  know  from  the  letters  of  Aphrahat) 
hardly  followed  at  all;  there  men  saw  no  cause  to  quarrel  about  what,  so  far 
as  they  were  concerned,  had  long  ago  been  settled.  The  breach  between  East 
and  West,  a consequence  of  the  Council  of  Ephesus  (43 1)  separated  two  Chris- 
tian that  of  the  “Persian  Church”  and  that  of  the  Greek  Church,  but 

this  was  no  more  than  the  manifestation  of  a difference,  inherent  from  the 
first,  between  mgAss  of  thought  proper  to  the  two  different  landscapes.  Nestorius 
and  the  whole  East  saw  in  Christ  the  Second  Adam,  the  Divine  Envoy  of  the 
last  xon.  Mary  had  borne  a 3W^;2-child  in  whose  human  and  created  substance 
(physis)  the  godly,  uncreated  element  dwelt.  The  West,  on  the  contrary,  saw  in 
Mary  the  Mother  of  2.  God:  the  divine  and  the  human  substance  formed  in  his 
body  (persona^  in  the  Classical  idiom  9 ^ unity,  named  by  Cyril  When 

the  Council  of  Ephesus  had  recognized  the  mother  of  God,  her  who  gave  birth 
to  God,  the  city  of  Diana’s  old  renown  burst  into  a truly  Classical  orgy  of 
celebration.^ 

But  long  ere  this  the  Syrian  Apollinaris  ^ had  heralded  the  “ Southern’  * idea 
of  the  matter  — that  in  the  living  Christ  there  was  not  merely  a substance,  but 
a single  substance.  The  divine  had  transmuted  itself  into,  not  mingled  itself 
with,  a human  substance  (no  Kpacris,  as  Gregory  Nazianzen  maintained  in 
opposition;  significantly  enough,  the  best  way  of  expressing  the  Monophysite 
idea  is  through  concepts  of  Spinoza  — the  one  substance  in  another  mode).  The 
Monophysites  called  the  Christ  of  the  Council  of  Chalcedon  (451,  where  the 
West  once  more  prevailed)  “the  idol  with  the  two  faces.”  They  not  only  fell 
away  from  the  Church,  they  broke  out  in  fierce  risings  in  Palestine  and  Egypt, 
and  when  in  Justinian’s  time  the  troops  of  Persia  — that  is,  of  Mazdaism  — 
penetrated  to  the  Nile,  they  were  hailed  by  the  Monophysites  as  liberators. 

The  fundamental  meaning  of  this  desperate  conflict  which  raged  for  a 

Scc,p.','6o.'  . . . 

® The  Ncstorians  protested  against  Theotokos  (she  who  bore  God),  opposing  to  her  the 
concept  of  Christ  the  Theophorus  (he  who  carried  God  in  him).  The  deep  difference  between  an 
image-loving  and  an  image-hating  religiousness  is  here  clearly  manifested. 

® Note  the  “Western”  outlook  on  the  substance-questions  in  the  contemporary  writings  of 
Proclus  — his  double  Zeus,  his  triad  of  Trar^p^  Shvafiis,  vorfcns  or  vorjrbvy  and  so  forth  (Zeller, 
ThHosophie  der  Griechen,  V,  pp.  857,  et  seq.).  Froclus's  beautiful  “Hymn  to  Athene”  is  a veritable 
Avc  Maria:  ' 

“But  when  an  evil  lapse  of  my  being  puts  me  into  bondage 

(And,  ah,  I know  indeed  how  I am  tossed  about  by  many  unholy  deeds  that  in  my 
blindness  I have  done). 

Be  thou  gracious  to  me,  thou  gentle  one,  thou  blessing  of  mankind, 

And  let  me  not  lie  upon  the  earth  as  prey  to  fearful  punishments. 

For  I am,  and  I remain,  thy  chattel.” 

(Hymn  VII,  Eudociae  Aug.  rel.  A.  Ludwich,  1897.) 

^ See  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  article  “Apollinaris,  the  Younger.”  — Tr. 


158  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

century  — not  over  scholarly  concepts,  but  over  the  soul  of  a landscape  that 
sought  to  be  set  free  in  its  people  — was  the  reversal  of  the  work  of  Paul.  If  we  can 
transport  ourselves  into  the  inmost  soul  of  the  two  new-born  nations,  making 
no  reservations  and  ignoring  all  minor  points  of  dogmatics,  then  we  see  how  the 
direction  of  Christianity  towards  the  Greek  West  and  its  intellectual  affinity 
with  the  Pagan  Church  culminated  in  the  position  that  the  Ruler  of  the  West 
was  the  Head  of  Christianity  in  general.  In  the  mind  of  Constantine  it  was 
self-evident  that  the  Pauline  foundation  within  the  Pseudomorphosis  was 
synonymous  with  Christianity.  The  Jewish  Christians  of  Petrine  tendency 
were  to  him  a heretical  sect,  and  the  Eastern  Christians  of  “Johannine”  type 
he  never  even  noticed.  When  the  spirit  of  the  Pseudomorphosis  had,  in  the 
three  determining  councils  of  Nicasa,  Ephesus,  and  Chalcedon,  put  its  seal  upon 
dogma,  once  and  for  all,  the  real  Arabian  world  rose  up  with  the  force  of 
nature  and  set  up  a barrier  against  it.  With  the  end  of  the  Arabian  Springtime, 
Christianity  fell  apart  for  good  into  three  religions,  which  can  be  symbolized 
by  the  names  of  Paul,  Peter,  and  John,  and  of  which  none  can  henceforth  claim 
to  be  regarded  by  the  historically  and  doctrinally  unprejudiced  eye  as  the  true 
and  proper  Christianity.  These  three  religions  are  at  the  same  time  three 
nations,  living  in  the  old  race-areas  of  Greeks,  Jews,  and  Persians,  and  the 
tongues  that  they  used  were  the  Church-languages  borrowed  from  them  — ^ 
namely,  Greek,  Aramaic,  and  Pehlevi. 

VII 

The  Eastern  Church,  since  the  Council  of  Niexa,  had  organized  itself  with 
an  episcopal  constitution,  at  the  head  of  which  stood  the  Katholikos  of  Ctesi- 
phon,  and  with  councils,  liturgy,  and  law  of  its  own.  In  486  the  Nestorian 
doctrine  was  accepted  as  binding,  and  the  tie  with  Constantinople  was  thus 
broken.  From  that  point  on,  Mazdaists,  Manichxans,  and  Nestorians  have  a 
common  destiny,  of  which  the  seed  was  sown  in  the  Gnosis  of  Bardesanes.  In 
the  Monophysite  Churches  of  the  South,  the  spirit  of  the  primitive  Community 
emerged  again  and  spread  itself  further;  with  its  uncompromising  monotheism 
and  its  hatred  of  images  its  closest  affinity  was  with  Talmudic  Judaism,  and  its 
old  battle-cry  of  eh  had  already  marked  it  to  be,  with  that  Judaism,  the 
starting-point  of  Islam  (**  Allah  il  Allah”).  The  Western  Church  continued  to 
be  bound  up  with  the  fate  of  the  Roman  Empire  — that  is,  the  cult-Church 
became  the  State.  Gradually  it  absorbed  into  itself  the  adherents  of  the  Pagan 
Church,  and  thenceforth  its  importance  lay  not  so  much  in  itself  — for  Islam 
almost  annihilated  it  — but  in  the  accident  that  it  was  from  it  that  the  young 
peoples  of  the  Western  Culture  received  the  Christian  system  as  the  basis  for  a 
new  creation,^  receiving  it,  moreover,  in  the  Latin  guise  of  the  extreme  West  — 
which  for  the  Greek  Church  itself  was  unmeaning,  since  Rome  was  now  a 
^ And  Russia,  too,  though  hithctto  Russia  has  kept  it  as  a buried  treasure. 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  15^ 

Greek  city,  and  the  Latin  language  was  far  more  truly  at  home  in  Africa  and 
Gaul. 

The  essential  and  elemental  concept  of  the  Magian  nation,  a being  that  con- 
sists in  extension,  had  been  from  the  beginning  active  in  extending  itself.  All 
these  Churches  were,  deliberately,  forcefully,  and  successfully,  missionary 
Churches.  But  it  was  not  until  men  had  at  last  ceased  to  think  of  the  end  of 
the  world  as  imminent,  and  dogma  appropriate  to  prolonged  existence  in  this 
World’s  Cavern  had  been  built  up,  and  the  Magian  religions  had  taken  up  their 
standpoint  towards  the  problem  of  substance,  that  the  extending  of  the  Culture 
took  up  that  swift,  passionate  tempo  that  distinguished  it  from  all  others  and 
found  in  Islam  its  most  impressive,  its  last,  but  by  no  means  its  only  example. 
Of  these  mighty  facts  Western  theologians  and  historians  give  an  entirely  false 
picture.  Ail  that  their  gaze,  riveted  upon  the  Mediterranean  lands,  observes  is 
the  Western  direction  that  fits  in  with  their  “ Ancient-Mediae val-Modern** 
schema,  and  even  within  these  limits,  accepting  the  ostensible  unity  of  Chris- 
tianity, they  regard  it  as  passing  at  a certain  period  from  a Greek  into  a Latin 
form,  whereby  the  Greek  residue  is  lost  sight  of  altogether. 

But  even  before  Christianity  — and  this  is  a fact  of  which  the  immense 
significance  has  never  been  observed,  which  has  not  even  been  correctly  in- 
terpreted as  mission  effort  — the  Pagan  Church  had  won  for  the  Syncretic 
Cult  the  greater  part  of  the  population  of  North  Africa,  Spain,  Gaul,  Britain, 
and  the  Rhine  and  Danube  frontiers.  Of  the  Druidism  that  Csesar  had  found 
in  Gaul,  little  remained  extant  by  the  time  of  Constantine.  The  assimilation  of 
indigenous  local  gods  under  the  names  of  the  great  Magian  divinities  of  the 
Cult-Church  (and  especially  Mithras-Sol-Jupiter)  from  the  second  century  on, 
was  essentially  a process  of  conquest,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  later  emperor- 
worship.^  The  missionary  efforts  of  Christianity  here  would  have  been  less 
successful  than  they  were  if  the  other  cult-Church — its  near  relative  — had 
not  preceded  it.  But  the  latter’s  propaganda  was  by  no  means  limited  to  bar- 
barian fields;  even  in  the  fifth  century  the  missionary  Asclepiodotus  converted 
Aphrodisias,  a Carian  city,  from  Christianity  to  Paganism. 

The  Jews,  as  has  been  shown  already,  directed  missionary  effort  on  a large 
scale  towards  the  East  and  the  South.  Through  southern  Arabia  they  drove  into 
the  heart  of  Africa,  possibly  even  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  while  on  the  side 
of  the  East  their  presence  in  China  is  demonstrable,  even  in  the  second  century. 
To  the  north  the  realm  of  the  Khazars^  and  its  capital,  Astrakhan,  later  went 
over  to  Judaism.  From  this  area  came  the  Mongols  of  Jewish  religion  who 
advanced  into  the  heart  of  Germany  and  were  defeated,  along  with  the 
Hungarians,  in  the  battle  of  the  Lechfeld  in  955.  Jewish  scholars  of  the  Span- 

^ The  Christian  missionary  efforts  of  the  West  very  generally  followed  the  same  method,  main- 
taining the  local  places  of  prayer,  and  merely  substituting  crucifixes  or  relics  for  the  idols.  Gregory 
the  Great  even  sanctioned  the  sacrifice  of  animals  in  Britain.  — Tr, 

2 Sec  Ency,  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  art.  ’“Khazars.*'  — -Tr, 


.^60  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

ish-Moorish  universities  petitioned  the  Byzantine  Emperor  (in  a.d.  iooo)  for 
safe-conduct  for  an  embassy  that  was  to  ask  the  Khazars  whether  they  were 
the  Lost  Tribes  of  Israel. 

From  the  Tigris,  Mazdaists  and  Manichasans  penetrated  the  empires  on 
either  hand,  Roman  and  Chinese,  to  their  utmost  frontiers.  Persian,  as  the 
Mithras  cult,  invaded  Britain;  Manichasism  had  by  400  become  a danger 
to  Greek  Christianity,  and  there  were  Manichaean  sects  in  southern  France  as 
late  as  the  Crusades^;  but  the  two  religions  drove  eastwards  as  well,  along 
the  Great  Wall  of  China  (where  the  great  polyglot  inscription  of  Kara  Bal- 
gassun  testifies  to  the  introduction  of  the  Manichasan  faith  in  the  Oigur  realm) 
and  even  to  Shantung.  Persian  fire-temples  arose  in  the  interior  of  China,  and 
from  700  Persian  expressions  are  found  in  Chinese  astrological  writings. 

The  three  Christian  Churches  everywhere  followed  up  the  blazed  trails. 
When  the  Western  Church  converted  the  Frankish  King  Chlodwig  in  496,  the 
missionaries  of  the  Eastern  Church  had  already  reached  Ceylon  and  the  western- 
most Chinese  garrisons  of  the  Great  Wall,  and  those  of  the  Southern  were  in  the 
Empire  of  Axum.  At  the  same  time  as,  after  Boniface  (718),  Germany  became 
converted,  the  Nestotian  missionaries  were  within  an  ace  of  winning  China 
itself.  They  had  entered  Shantung  in  638.  The  Emperor  Kao-tsung  (651-84) 
permitted  churches  to  be  built  in  all  provinces  of  the  Empire,  in  750  Christianity 
was  preached  in  the  Imperial  palace  itself,  and  in  781,  according  to  the  Aramaic 
and  Chinese  inscriptions  upon  a memorial  column  in  Singafu  which  has  been 
preserved,  “all  China  was  covered  with  the  palaces  of  Concord.”  But  it  is  in 
the  highest  degree  significant  that  the  Confucians,  who  cannot  be  called  inexpert 
in  religious  matters,  regarded  the  Nestorians,  Mazdaists,  and  Manichasans  as  ad- 
herents of  a single  “Persian”  religion,^  just  as  the  population  of  the  Western 
Roman  provinces  were  unable  to  discriminate  between  Mithras  and  Christ. 

Islam,  therefore,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  Puritanism  of  the  whole  group  of 
Early  Magian  religions,  emerging  as  a religion  only  formally  new,  and  in  the 
domain  of  the  Southern  Church  and  Talmudic  Judaism.  It  is  this  deeper  sig- 
nificance, and  not  merely  the  force  of  its  warlike  onslaught,  that  gives  the  key 
to  its  fabulous  successes.  Although  on  political  grounds  it  practised  an  as- 
tounding toleration  — John  Damascenus,  the  last  great  dogmatist  of  the  Greek 
Church,  was,  under  the  name  of  A1  Manzor,  treasurer  to  the  Caliph — Judaism, 
Mazdaism,  and  the  Southern  and  Eastern  churches  of  Christianity  were  swiftly 
and  almost  completely  dissolved  in  it.  The  Katholikos  of  Seleucia,  Jesujabh  III, 
complains  that  tens  of  thousands  of  Christians  went  over  to  it  as  soon  as  it  came 
on  the  scene,  and  in  North  Africa  — - the  home  of  Augustine  — the  entire 
population  fell  away  to  Islam  at  once.  Mohammed  died  in  63^.  In  641  the 
whole  domain  of  the  Monophysites  and  the  Nestorians  (and,  therefore,  of  the 

^ The  Albigcnsian  tnovement  of  the  twelfth  century,  — Tn 

® Hermann,  Chims,  GmhichU  p.  77* 


THE  MAGIAN  SOUL  ^6i 

Talmud  and  the  Avesta)  were  in  the  possession  of  Islam.  In  717  it  stood  before 
Gonstantinopic,  and  the  Greek  Church  was  in  peril  of  extinction.  Already  in 
618  a relative  of  the  prophet  had  brought  presents  to  the  Chinese  Emperor  Tai- 
dsung  and  obtained  leave  to  institute  a mission.  From  700  there  were  mosques 
in  Shantung,  and  in  72.0  Damascus  sent  instructions  to  the  Arabs  long  estab- 
lished in  southern  France  to  conquer  the  realm  of  the  Franks.  Two  centuries 
later,  when  in  the  West  a new  religious  world  was  arising  out  of  the  remains  of 
the  old  Western  Church,  Islam  was  in  the  Sudan  and  in  Java. 

For  all  this,  Islam  is  significant  only  as  a piece  of  outward  religious  history. 
The  inner  history  of  the  Magian  religion  ends  with  Justinian’s  time,  as  truly 
as  that  of  the  Faustian  ends  with  Charles  V and  the  Council  of  Trent. 
Any  book  on  religious  history  shows  Christian  religion  as  having  had 

two  ages  of  grand  thought-movements  — 0-500  in  the  East  and  1000-1500  in  the  West.^ 
But  these  are  two  spingtimes  of  two  Cultures^  and  in  them  are  comprised  also  the 
non-Christian  forms  which  belong  to  each  religious  development.  The  closing 
of  the  University  of  Athens  by  Justinian  in  5x9  was  not,  as  is  always  stated,  the 
end  of  Classical  philosophy  — there  had  been  no  Classical  philosophy  for 
centuries.  What  he  did,  forty  years  before  the  birth  of  Mohammed,  was  to 
end  the  theology  of  the  Pagan  Church  by  closing  this  school  and  — as  the 
historians  forget  to  add  — ■ to  end  the  Christian  theology  also  by  closing  those  of 
Antioch  and  Alexandria.  Dogma  was  complete,  finished  — just  as  it  was  in  the 
West  with  the  Council  of  Trent  (1564)  and  the  Confession  of  Augsburg  (1540), 
for  with  the  city  and  intellectualism  religious  creative  force  comes  to  an  end. 
So  also  in  Jewry  and  in  Persia,  the  Talmud  was  concluded  about  500,  and  when 
Chosroes  Nushirvan  in  519  bloodily  suppressed  the  Reformation  of  Maxdak  — 
which  was  not  unlike  our  Anabaptism  in  its  rejection  of  marriage  and  worldly 
property,  and  had  been  supported  by  King  Kobad  I as  counteracting  the  power 
of  Church  and  nobility  — Avestan  dogma  similarly  passed  into  fixity. 

^ A third,  “contemporary,"  movement  should  follow  in  the  Russian  world  in  the  first  half  of 
the  coming  millennium. 


CHAPTER  IX 

PROBLEMS  OF  THE  ARABIAN  CULTURE 

: (C) 

PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL 


CHAPTER  IX 


PROBLEMS  OF  THE  ARABIAN  CULTURE 

CC) 

PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL 
I ' 

Religion  may  be  described  as  the  Waking-Being  of  a living  creature  in  the 
moments  when  it  overcomes,  masters,  denies,  and  even  destroys  Being.  Race- 
life  and  the  pulse  of  its  drive  dwindle  as  the  eyes  gaze  into  an  extended,  tense, 
and  light-filled  world,  and  Time  yields  to  Space,  The  plantlike  desire  for  ful- 
filment goes  out,  and  from  primary  depths  there  wells  up  the  animal  fear  of 
the  fulfilment,  of  the  ceasing  of  direction,  of  death.  Not  hate  and  love,  but 
fear  and  love  are  the  basic  feelings  of  religion.  Hate  and  fear  differ  as  Time  and 
Space,  blood  and  eye,  pulse  and  tension,  heroism  and  saintliness.  And  love  in 
the  race-sense  differs  from  love  in  the  religious  sense  in  the  same  way. 

All  religion  is  turned  to  light.  The  extended  itself  becomes  religious  as  a 
world  of  the  eye  comprehended  from  the  ego  as  centre  of  light.  Hearing  and 
touch  are  adjusted  to  what  is  seen  and  the  Invisible^  whose  workings  are  sensed, 
becomes  the  sum  of  the  daemonic.  All  that  we  designate  by  the  words  “ deity,"’ 
“revelation,”  “salvation,”  “dispensation,”  is  in  one  way  and  another  an 
element  of  illumined  actuality.  Death,  for  man,  is  something  that  he  sees,  and 
knows  by  seeing,  and  in  relation  to  death  birth  is  the  other  secret.  They  are  the 
two  visible  limits  of  the  sensible  cosmic  that  is  incarnate  in  a live  body  in 
lighted  space. 

There  are  two  sorts  of  deeper  fear  — one  is  fear  (known  even  to  the  animals) 
in  presence  of  microcosmic  freedom  in  space,  before  space  itself  and  its  powers, 
before  death;  the  other  is  fear  /or  the  cosmic  current  of  being,  for  life,  for 
directional  time.  The  first  awakens  a dark  feeling  that  freedom  in  the  extended 
is  just  a new  and  deeper  sort  of  dependence  than  that  which  rules  the  vegetable 
world,  and  it  leads  the  individual  being,  sensible  of  its  weakness,  to  seek  the 
propinquity  and  alliance  of  others.  Anxiety  produces  speech,  and  our  sort  of 
speech  is  religion  — every  religion.  Out  of  the  fear  of  Space  arise  the  numina  of 
the  world-as-nature  and  the  cults  of  gods;  out  of  the  fear  for  time  arise  the  numina 
of  life^  of  sex  and  breed,  of  the  State,  centring  on  ancestor-worship.  That  is  the 
difference  between  Taboo  and  Totem  ^ — for  the  totemistic,  too,  always  appears 
in  religious  form,  out  of  holy  awe  of  that  which  passeth  all  understanding  and 
is  for  ever  alien. 

^ Cf.  pp.  3,  et  seq.  and  foot-note  p.  3. 

z6y 


^ See  p.  1 16. 


z66 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

The  higher  religion  requires  tense  alertness  against  the  powers  of  blood  and 
being  that  ever  lurk  in  the  depths  ready  to  recapture  their  primeval  rights  over 
the  j/mnger  side  of  life,  '*lVafd  and  pray,  that  ye  fall  not  into  temptation/’ 
Nevertheless,  “liberation”  is  a fundamental  word  in  every  religion  and  an 
eternal  wish  of  every  waking-being.  In  this  general,  almost  prereligious,  sense, 
it  means  the  desire  for  freedom  from  the  anxieties  and  anguishes  of  waking- 
consciousness;  for  relaxation  of  the  tensions  of  fear-born  thought  and  search; 
for  the  obliteration  and  removal  of  the  consciousness  of  the  Ego’s  loneli- 
ness in  the  universe,  the  rigid  conditionedness  of  nature,  the  prospect  of  the 
immovable  boundary  of  all  Being  in  eld  and  death. 

Sleep,  too,  liberates — “Death  and  his  brother  Sleep.”  And  holy  wine, 
intoxication,  breaks  the  rigour  of  the  spirit’s  tension,  and  dancing,  the  Dio- 
nysus art,  and  every  other  form  of  stupefaction  and  ecstasy.  These  are  modes 
of  slipping  out  of  awareness  by  the  aid  of  being,  the  cosmic,  the  “it,”  the 
escap  out  of  space  into  time.  But  higher  than  all  these  stands  the  genuinely 
religious  overcoming  of  fear  by  means  of  the  understanding  itself.  The  tension 
between  microcosm  and  macrocosm  becomes  something  that  we  can  love, 
something  in  which  we  can  wholly  immerse  ourselves.^  We  call  this  faiths 
and  it  is  the  beginning  of  all  man’s  intellectual  life. 

Understanding  is  causal  only,  whether  deductive  or  inductive,  whether 
derived  from  sensation  or  not.  It  is  wholly  impossible  to  distinguish  being- 
understood  from  being-caused  — both  express  the  same  thing.  When  something 
is  “actual”  for  us,  we  see  it  and  think  it  in  causal  (ursdchlich')  form,  just  as  we 
feel  and  know  ourselves  and  our  activities  as  things  originating,  causes  (£/f- 
sache).  The  assignment  of  causes  is,  however,  different  from  case  to  case,  not 
only  in  the  religious,  but  also  generally  in  the  inorganic  logic  of  man.  A fact 
is  thought  of  at  one  moment  as  having  such-and-such,  at  another  moment  as 
having  something  else,  as  its  cause.  Every  kind  of  thinking  has  for  every  one 
of  its  domains  of  application  a proper  “system.”  In  everyday  life  a causal 
connexion  in  thought  is  never  exactly  repeated.  Even  in  modern  physics 
working  hypotheses  — that  is,  causal  systems  — which  partially  exclude  one 
another  are  in  use  side  by  side;  for  instance,  the  ideas  of  electrodynamics  and 
those  of  thermodynamics.  The  significance  of  the  thought  is  not  thereby 
nullified,  for  during  a continuous  spell  of  waking-consciousness  we  “under- 
stand” always  in  the  form  of  single  acts  of  which  each  has  its  own  causal 
inception.  The  viewing  of  the  entire  world-as-nature  in  relation  to  the  individ- 
ual consciousness  as  a single  causally-ordered  concatenation  is  something 
perfectly  unrealizable  by  our  thought,  inasmuch  as  our  thinking  proceeds 
always  by  unit  acts.  It  remains  a belief.  It  is  indeed  Faith  itself,  for  it  is  the 
basis  of  religious  understanding  of  the  world,  which,  wherever  something  is 
observed,  postulates  numina  as  a necessity  of  thought  — ephemeral  numina  for 

^ "He  who  loves  God  with  inmost  soul,  transforms  himself  into  God"  (Bernard  of  Clairvaux). 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL/  167 

incidental  events  which  are  not  again  thought  of,  and  enduring  numina  as 
place-definite  indwcllers  (of  springs,  trees,  stones,  hiils,  stars,  and  so  forth) 
or  as  universals  (like  the  gods  of  Heaven,  of  War,  of  Wisdom)  which  can  be 
present  anywhere.  These  numina  are  limited  only  in  virtue  of  the  individual- 
oess  of  each  separate  act  of  thought.  That  which  to-day  is  a property  of  the 
god  is  to-morrow  itself  the  god.  Others  are  now  a plurality,  now  a unity, 
now  a vague  Ent.  There  are  invisibles  (shapes)  and  incomprehensibles 
(principles),  which,  to  those  to  whom  it  is  vouchsafed,  may  become  phenomenal 
or  comprehensible.  Fate  ^ in  the  Classical  QdfiappepT})  and  in  the  Indian  (rta) 
is  something  which  stands  as  origin-thing  (Ur-Sach')  above  the  picturable 
divinities;  Magian  Destiny,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  operation  of  the  one  and 
formless  supreme  God.  Religious  thought  ever  lets  itself  graduate  values 
and  rank  within  the  causal  succession,  and  leads  up  to  supreme  beings  or  prin- 
ciples, as  very  first  and  “governing”  causes;  “dispensation”  is  the  word 
used  for  the  most  comprehensive  of  all  systems  based  upon  valuation.  Science, 
on  the  contrary,  is  a mode  of  understanding  which  fundamentally  abhors 
distinctions  of  rank  amongst  causes;  what  it  finds  is  not  dispensation,  but 
law. 

The  understanding  of  causes  sets  free.  Belief  in  the  linkages  discovered 
compels  the  world-fear  to  retreat.  God  is  man’s  refuge  from  the  Destiny  which 
he  can  feel  and  livingly  experience,  but  not  think  on,  or  figure,  or  name,  and 
which  sinks  into  abeyance  for  so  long  — only  for  so  long  — as  the  “critical” 
(literally,  the  separating)  fear-born  understanding  can  establish  causes  behind 
causes  comprehensibly;  that  is,  in  order  visible  to  the  outer  or  inner  eye.  It  is 
the  desperate  dilemma  of  the  higher  grade  of  man  that  his  powerful  will  to 
understand  is  in  constant  contradiction  with  his  being.  It  has  ceased  to  serve 
his  life,  but  is  unable  to  rule  it,  and  consequently  in  all  important  con- 
junctures there  remains  an  insoluble  clement.  “One  has  merely  to  declare 
oneself  free,  and  one  feels  the  moment  to  be  conditioned.  But  if  one  has 
the  courage  to  declare  oneself  conditioned,  then  one  has  the  feeling  of  being 
free”  (Goethe). 

We  name  a causal  linkage  within  the  world-as-nature,  as  to  which  we  are 
convinced  that  no  further  reflection  can  alter  it  — Truth.  Truths  are  es- 
tablished, and  they  are  timeless — • “absolute”  means  detached  from  Destiny 
and  history,  but  detached  also  from  the  facts  of  our  own  living  and  dying  — 
and  they  are  an  inward  liberation,  consolation,  and  salvation,  in  that  they 
dis value  and  overcome  the  incalculable  happenings  of  the  world  of  facts.  Or, 
as  it  mirrors  itself  in  the  mind,  men  may  go,  but  truth  remains. 

In  the  world-around  something  is  esfablished  — that  is,  fixed,  spellbound. 

^ For  religious  thought  Destiny  is  always  a causal;  quantity.  Epistemology  knows  it,  there- 
fore, only  as  an  indistinct  word  for  causality.  Only  so  long  as  we  do  not  think  upon  it  do  we  really 
know  it. 


i68  ■ ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

Understanding  man  has  the  secret  in  the  hands,  whether  this  be,  as  of  old,  some 
potent  charm  or,  as  nowadays,  a mathematical  formula,  A feeling  of  triumph, 
even  to-day,  accompanies  every  experimental  step  in  the  realm  of  Nature 
which  determines  something  — about  the  purposes  and  powers  of  the  god  of 
heaven  or  the  storm-spirits  of  the  ground-daemons;  or  about  the  numina  of 
natural  science  (atom-nuclei,  the  velocity  of  light,  gravitation);  or  even  about 
the  abstract  numina  that  thought  conceives  in  contemplating  its  own  image 
(concept,  category,  reason)  — and,  in  determining,  fixes  it  in  the  prison  of  an 
unalterable  system  of  causal  relations.  Experience  in  this  inorganic,  killing, 
preserving  sense,  which  is  something  quite  different  from  life-experience  and 
knowledge  of  men,  takes  place  in  two  modes  — theory  and  technique or,  in 
religious  language,  myth  and  cult  — according  as  the  believer's  intention  is  to 
open  up  or  to  confine  the  secrets  of  the  world-around.  Both  demand  a high 
development  of  human  understanding.  Both  may  he  born  of  either  fear  or  love. 
There  is  a mythology  of  fear,  like  the  Mosaic  and  the  primitive  generally,  and  a 
mythology  of  love,  like  that  of  early  Christianity  and  Gothic  mysticism. 
Similarly  there  is  a technique  of  defensive,  and  another  technique  of  postulant, 
magic,  and  this,  no  doubt  the  most  fundamental,  distinction  between  sacrifice 
and  prayer  ^ distinguishes  also  primitive  and  mature  mankind.  Religiousness 
is  a trait  of  soul,  but  religion  is  a talent.  '“Theory"  demands  the  gift  of  vision 
that  few  possess  to  the  extent  of  luminous  insight  and  many  possess  not  at  all. 
It  is  world-view,  Weltanschauung  ' in  the  most  primary  sense,  whether  what 
one  sees  in  that  world  is  the  hand  and  the  loom  of  powers,  or  (in  a colder  urban 
spirit,  not  fearing  or  loving,  but  inquisitive)  the  theatre  of  law-conform 
forces.  The  secrets  of  Taboo  and  Totem  are  beheld  in  god-faiths  and  soul-faiths, 
and  calculated  in  theoretical  physics  and  biology.  “Technique"  presupposes 
the  intellectual  gift  of  binding  and  conjuring.  The  theorist  is  the  critical  seer, 
the  technician  is  the  priest,  the  discoverer  is  the  prophet. 

The  means,  however,  in  which  the  whole  force  of  intellect  concentrates 
itself  IS  the  form  of  the  actual,  which  is  abstracted  from  vision  by  speech,  and  of 
which  not  every  waking-consciousness  can  discern  the  quintessence  — the 
conceptual  circumscription,  the  communicable  law,  name,  number.  Hence 
every  conjuration  of  the  deity  is  based  on  the  knowledge  of  its  real  name  and 
the  use  of  rites  and  sacraments,  known  and  available  only  to  the  initiated,  of 
which  the  form  must  be  exact  and  the  words  correct.  This  applies  not  merely 
to  primitive  magic,  but  just  as  much  to  our  physical  (and  particularly  our 
medical)  technique.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  mathematics  have  a character  of 
sanctity  and  are  regularly  the  product  of  a religious  milieu  (Pythagoras, 
Descartes,  Pascal);  that  there  is  a mysticism  of  sacred  numbers  (3,  7,  ix)  in 
See  p.  15. 

® The  distinction  between  the  two  is  one  of  inner  form.  A sacrifice  made  by  Socrates  is  at  bot- 
tom a prayer;  and  generally  the  Classical  sacrifice  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  a prayer  in  bodily  form. 
the  ejaculated  prayer  of  the  criminal,  on  the  contrary,  is  a sacrifice  to  which  fear  drives  him. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL.  169 

every  religion/  and  that  Ornament  (of  which  cult-architecture  is  the  highest 
form)  is  essentially  number  felt  as  shape.  It  is  rigid,  Gompelling  forms,  ex- 
pression-inotiYes  and  communication-signs  ^ that  the  microcosm  employs  in  the 
world  of  waking-consciousness  to  get  into  touch  with  the  macrocosm.  In 
sacerdotal  technique  they  are  called  precepts,  and  in  scientific,  laws— but 
both  are  really  name  and  number,  and  primitive  man  would  discover  no  differ- 
ence  between  the  magic  wherewith  the  priests  of  his  villages  command  the 
daemons  and  that  wherewith  the  civilized  technician  commands  his  machines. 

The  first,  and  perhaps  the  only,  outcome  of  man*s  will-to-understanding  is 
**  I believe’  ’ is  the  great  word  against  metaphysical  fear,  and  at  the  same 
time  it  is  an  avowal  of  love.  Even  though  one’s  researches  or  accumulation  of 
knowledge  may  culminate  in  sudden  illumination  or  conclusive  calculation, 
yet  all  one’s  own  sense  and  comprehension  would  be  meaningless  unless  there 
were  set  up  along  with  it  an  inward  certainty  of  a “something”  which  as 
other  and  alien  u — and  is,  moreover,  exactly  under  the  ascertained  shape  — - 
in  the  concatenation  of  cause  and  effect.  The  highest  intellectual  possession, 
therefore,  known  to  man  as  a being  of  speech-deduced  thought,  is  the 
firm  and  hard-won  belief  in  this  something,  withdrawn  from  the  courses  of 
time  and  destiny,  which  he  has  separated  out  by  contemplation  and  labelled 
by  name  and  number.  But  that  something  is  remains  in  the  last  analysis 
obscure.  Was  it  the  something  of  secret  logic  of  the  universe  that  was  touched, 
or  only  a silhouette?  And  all  the  struggle  and  passion  starts  afresh,  and  anxious 
investigation  directs  itself  upon  this  new  doubt,  which  may  well  turn  to  despair. 
He  needs  in  his  intellectual  boring  of  belief  a something  attainable  by 
thought,  an  end  of  dissection  that  leaves  no  remainder  of  mystery.  The  corners 
and  pockets  of  his  world  of  contemplation  must  all  be  illuminated  — nothing 
less  will  give  him  his  release. 

Here  belief  passes  over  into  the  knowledge  evoked  by  mistrust,  or,  more 
accurately,  becomes  belief  in  that  knowledge.  For  the  latter  form  of  the  under- 
standing is  radically  dependent  upon  the  former;  it  is  posterior,  more  artificial, 
more  questionable.  Further,  religious  theory  — that  is,  the  contemplation 
of  the  believer  — ka/^s  to  priestly  practice,  but  scientific  theory,  on  the  con- 
trary, liberates  itself  by  contemplation  from  the  technical  knowledge  of  every  day 
life.^  The  firm  belief  that  is  bred  by  illuminations,  revelations,  sudden  deep 
glimpses,  can  dispense  with  critical  work.  But  critical  knowledge  presupposes 
the  belief  that  its  methods  will  lead  to  just  that  which  is  desired  — that  is, 
not  to  fresh  imaginings,  but  to  the  “actual.”  History,  however,  teaches  that 
doubt  as  to  belief  leads  to  knowledge,  and  doubt  as  to  knowledge  (after  a 
period  of  critical  optimism)  back  again  to  belief.  As  theoretical  knowledge 

^ A.nd  herein  philosophy  differs  not  in  the  least  from  soil-sprung  folk-belief.  Think  of  Kant's 
rategory-table  with  its  3 X 4 units,  of  Hegel's  method,  of  lamblichus's  triads. 

2 Sec  p.  133. 


^70  the  decline  of  THE  WEST 

frees  itself  from  confiding  acceptance,  it  is  marching  to  self-destruction,  after 

which  what  remains  is  simply  and  solely  technical  experience. 

^Belief,  in  its  primitive,  unclear  condition,  acknowledges  superior  sources 
of  wLom  by  wMch  things  that  man’s  own  subtlety  could  never  -travel  ^ 

more  or  less  manifest -such  as  prophetk  words, 

scriotures  the  voice  of  the  deity.  The  critical  spirit,  on  the  contrary,  wants, 
Infwkves  itself  able,  to  look  into  everything  for  itself.  It  not  only  mistru^s 
aUen  truths,  but  even  denies  their  possibility.  Truth,  for  «,  is  only  k^owle^ 
that  it  has  proved  for  itself.  But  if  pure  criticism  creates  its  means  out  of  itself 
solely  it  dfd  not  long  go  unperceived  that  this  position  assumed  the  reality  of 
the  r^ult.  De  omnibus  duhitandum  is  a proposition  that  is  incapable  of  being 
actualized.  It  is  apt  to  be  forgotten  that  critical  activity  must  rest  upon  a 
M and  the  possibility  of  obtaining  this  method  in  turn  by  the  way  of 
criticism  is  only  Apparent.  For,  in  reality,  it  follows  from  the  momentary  dis- 
position of  the  thought.!  That  is,  the  results  of  criticism  t^iemselves  are  de- 
by  the  b.sic  methoj,  but  tbit  in  turn  is  determined  by  the  sttem  of 
being  which  carries  and  perfuses  the  waking-consciousness.  The  belief  in  a 
knowledge  that  needs  no  postulates  is  merely  a mark  of  the  license  naivete  of 
rationalist  periods.  A theory  of  natural  science  is  nothing  but  a historically 
older  dogm^a  in  another  shape.  And  the  only  profit  from  it  is  that  which 
life  obtains,  in  the  shape  of  a successful  technique,  to  which  theory  has  provided 
the  key.  It  has  already  been  said  that  the  value  of  a working  hypothesis  resides 
not  in  its  “ correctness”  but  in  its  usableness.  But  discoveries  of  another  sort, 
findings  of  insight,  “Truths”  in  the  optimistic  sense,  cannot  be  the  outcome 
of  pufely  scientific  understanding,  since  this  always  presupposes  an  existing 
view  upon  which  its  critical,  dissecting  activity  can  operate;  the  natural 
science  of  the  Baroque  is  one  continuous  dissection  of  the  religious  world-pic- 

ture  of  the  Gothic.  . . i:r^ 

The  aim  of  faith  and  science,  fear  and  curiosity,  is  not  to  experience  life, 

but  to  know  the  world-as-nature.  Of  world-as-history  they  are  the  express 

negation.  But  the  secret  of  waking-consciousness  is  a twofold  one;  two  fe^- 

born,  causally  ordered  pictures  arise  for  the  inner  eye  - the  outer  world  _ 
and  as  its  counter-image  the  “inner  world.  In  both  are  true  problems,  and 
the  waking-consciousness  is  not  only  a look-out,  but  is  very  busy  within  its 
own  domains  as  well.  The  Numen  out  there  is  called  God;  in  here  Soul.  By 
the  critical  understanding  the  deities  of  the  believer’s  vision  are  transmuted 
in  thought  into  mechanical  magnitudes  referable  to  its  world,  but  their  essence 
and  kernel  remain  the  same  — Classical  matter  and  form,  Magian  light  and 
darkness,  Faustian  force  and  mass  — and  its  mode  is  ever  the  same  dissection 

1 And  even  so  the  thought  has  a different  disposition  according  as  it  is  primitive  or  cultmed; 
Chinel  Indian.  Classical.  Magian.  or  West^;  and  even  German.  English,  or  French.  In  the  last 
resort,  there  axe  not  even  two  individuals  with  exactly  the  same  method. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  '171 

of  the  primitive  soul-belief,  aad  its  end  is  ever  the  same,  a predetermined  result. 
The  physics  of  the  within  is  called  systematic  psychology  and  it  discovers  in 
man,  if  it  is  Classical  science,  thing-like  sonhparts  (yovs,  Bvixos,  hriMvijXa);  if 
Magian,  soul-jj^te^««  (ruach,  nephesh);  if  Faustian,  soul-forces  (thinking,  feel- 
ing, willing).  These  are  the  shapes  that  religious  meditation,  in  fear  and  in 
love,  then  follows  up  in  the  causal  relations  of  guilt,  sin,  pardon,  conscience, 
reward,  and  punishment. 

Being  is  a mystery  that,  as  soon  as  faith  and  science  turn  their  attention  to 
it,  illudes  them  into  fateful  error.  Instead  of  the  cosmic  itself  being  reached 
(which  is  completely  outside  the  possibilities  of  the  active  waking-conscious- 
ness) the  sensible  mobility  of  body  in  the  field  of  the  eye,  and  the  conceptual 
image  of  a mechanical-causal  chain  abstracted  therefrom,  are  subjected  to 
analysis.  But  real  life  is  led,  not  cognised.  Only  the  Timeless  is  true.  Truths  lie 
beyond  history  and  life,  and  vice  versa  life  is  something  beyond  all  causes, 
effects,  and  truths.  Criticism  in  both  cases,  critique  of  waking-consciousness 
and  critique  of  being,  are  contrary  to  happening  and  alien  to  life.  But  in  the 
first  case  the  application  of  a critique  is  entirely  justified  by  the  critical  intention 
and  the  inner  logic  of  the  object  that  is  referred  to;  in  the  second  case  it  is  not. 
It  follows  that  the  distinction  between  faith  and  knowledge,  or  fear  and  curi- 
osity, or  revelation  and  criticism,  is  not,  after  all,  the  ultimate  distinction. 
Knowledge  is  only  a late  form  of  belief.  But  belief  and  life,  love  springing  from 
the  secret  fear  of  the  world,  and  love  springing  from  the  secret  hate  of  the  sexes, 
knowledge  of  inorganic  and  sense  of  organic  logic.  Causes  and  Destinies  — 
this  is  the  deepest  opposition  of  all.  And  here  we  distinguish  men,  not  ac- 
cording to  what  their  modes  of  thinking  are- — religious  or  critical  — nor 
according  to  the  objects  of  their  thought,  but  according  to  whether  they  are 
thinkers  (no  matter  about  what) 

In  the  realm  of  doing  the  waking-consciousness  takes  charge  only  when  it 
hccomts  technique.  Religious  knowledge,  too,  is  power — man  is  not  only 
ascertaining  causations,  but  handling  them.  He  who  knows  the  secret  rela- 
tionship between  microcosm  and  macrocosm  commands  it  also,  whether  the 
knowledge  has  come  to  him  by  revelation  or  by  eavesdropping.  Thus  the 
magician  and  conjuror  is  truly  the  Taboo-man.  He  compels  the  deity  through 
sacrifice  and  prayer;  he  practises  the  true  rites  and  sacraments  because  they  are 
causes  of  inevitable  results,  and  whosoever  knows  them,  him  they  must  serve. 
He  reads  in  the  stars  and  in  the  sacred  books;  in  his  power  lies,  timeless  and 
immune  from  all  accident,  the  causal  relation  of  sin  and  propitiation,  repentance 
and  absolutions,  sacrifice  and  grace.  His  chain  of  sacred  origins  and  results 
makes  him  himself  a vessel  of  mysterious  power  and,  therefore,  a cause  of  new 
effects,  in  which  one  must  have  faith  before  one  may  have  them  imparted. 

From  this  starting-point  we  can  understand  (what  the  European-American 
world  of  to-day  has  wellnigh  forgotten)  the  ultimate  meaning  of  religious 


THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 
ethics  Moral.  It  is,  ^vherevcr  true  and  strong,  a relation  that  has  the  full  import 
..i  it  is  (to  .St  Loyok-s  pht^o 

befot/tht  dtity,'  who  is  to  be  softeod  and  con, *=d  toby  Wha 

iall  I do  to  be  sanedP"  This  “wtati’;  is  the  key  to  tie  untoani^  rf  ^ 
t 1 itQ  fhere  is  ever  a wherefore  and  a way,  even  in  ine 

caL'of  those  few  sublimate  philosophers  who  have 

“for  its  own  sake”  - confessing  in  the  very  phrase  that  deep  down  they  feel  a 
“wherefore,”  even  though  but  a sympathetic  few  of  their  own  kind  can  appre- 
ciate it  There  is  only  causal  moral— th.^t  is,  ethcal  technique  on  t e ac  - 

^Z'tlr“"XCed  causality  of  the  conduct,  .past  fton.  ali 
par^ulars  of  actual  life  and  character,  something  eternal  and  universally 
vlhd  not  only  without  time,  but  hostile  to  time  and  for  that  ve^^ason 
“ true’.”  Even  if  mankind  did  not  exist,  moral  would  be  true  and  valid  is 
is  no  mere  conceit,  but  an  expression  of  the  ethical  inorganic  logic  of  the 
world  conceived  as  system  that  has  actually  been  used.  ^ ever  won 
philosopher  concede  that  it  could  have  a historical  evolution  and  fulfilment. 
Space  dLies  Time;  true  moral  is  absolute,  eternally  complete  and  the  same. 

In  the  depths  of  it  there  is  ever  a negation  of  life,  a refraining  and  renunciation 
carried  to  the  point  of  askesis  and  death  itself.  Negation 

phrases  — religious  moral  contains  prohibitions,  not  precepts.  Taboo,  even 
where  it  ostensibly  affirms,  is  a list  of  disclaimers.  To  liberate  oneself  from  the 
world  of  fact,  to  evade  the  possibilities  of  Destiny,  always  to  look  upon  the 
race  in  oneself  as  the  lurking  enemy  — nothing  but  hard 
exercise  will  give  that.  No  action  must  be  causal  or  impulsive^  that  is,  1 
to  the  blood  — everything  must  be  considered  according  to  motives  and  results 
and  “carried  out”  according  to  orders.  Extreme  tension  of  awareness  is  re- 
quired lest  we  fall  into  sin.  First  of  all  things,  continence  in  what  pertains  to 
the  blood,  love,  marriage.  Love  and  hate  in  mankind  are  cosmic 
the  love  of  the  sexes  is  the  very  polar  opposite  of  timeless  love  and  fear  of  God, 
and  therefore  it  is  the  prime  sin,  for  which  Adam  was  cast  forth  from  paradise 
and  burdened  man  with  the  heritage  of  guilt.  Conception  and  death  define  the 
life  of  the  body  in  space,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  the  hoAy  that  is  in  question  makes 
the  former  sin  and  the  latter  punishment.  'Z&isa.  (s^v-o.  (the  Glassmal  body  a 
grave!)  was  the  confession  of  the  Orphic  religion.  lEschylus  and  Pindar  com- 
prehended Being  as  a reproach,  and  the  saints  of  all  Cultures  feel  it  as  an  impiety 
that  has  to  be  killed  off  by  askesis  or  (what  is  nearly  related  thereto)  orgiastic 
squandering.  Action,  the  field  of  history,  the  deed,  heroism,  delight  in  battle 
and  victory  and  spoil,  are  evil.  For  in  them  the  pulse  of  cosmic  being  knocks 
on  the  door  too  loudly  and  disturbingly  for  contemplativeness  and  thought. 

1 Anatole  France’s  story  U jengkur  de.  Netre  .Dam  is  something  deeper  than  a beantifu! 
fancy.  — Tr. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,. ' CROMWELL  , 

The  whole  world — ^ meaning  the  world-as-history  ■— is  infamous.  It  fights 
instead  of  renouncing;  it  does  not  possess  the  idea  of  sacrifice.  It  prevails  over 
truth  by  means  of  facts.  As  it  follows  impulse,  it  baffles  thought  about  cause 
and  effect.  And  therefore  the  highest  sacrifice  that  intellectual  man  can  offer  is 
to  make  a personal  present  of  it  to  the  powers  of  nature.  Every  mot al  action  is  a 
piece  of  this  sacrifice y and  an  ethical  life-course  is  an  unbroken  chain  of  such 
sacrifices.  Above  all,  the  offering  of  sympathy,  com-passion,  in  which  the 
inwardly  strong  gives  up  his  superiority  to  the  powerless.  The  compassionate 
man  kills  something  within  himself.  But  we  must  not  confuse  this  sympathy 
in  the  grand  religious  sense  with  the  vague  sentimentality  of  the  everyday  man, 
who  cannot  command  himself,  still  less  with  the  race-feeling  of  chivalry  th.zt  is 
not  a moral  of  reasons  and  rules  at  all,  but  an  upstanding  and  self-evident 
tom  bred  of  the  unconscious  pulsations  of  a keyed-up  life.  That  which  in  civilized 
times  is  called  social  ethics  has  nothing  to  do  with  religion,  and  its  presence 
only  goes  to  show  the  weakness  and  emptiness  of  the  religiousness  of  the  day, 
which  has  lost  that  force  of  metaphysical  sureness  that  is  the  condition 
precedent  of  strong,  convinced,  and  self-denying  moral.  Think  for  instance  of 
the  difference  between  Pascal  and  Mill.  Social  ethic  is  nothing  but  practical 
politics.  It  is  a very  Late  product  of  the  same  historical  world  whose  Springtime 
(in  all  Cultures  alike)  has  witnessed  the  flowering  of  an  ethic  of  high  courage 
and  knightliness  in  a strong  stock  that  does  not  wince  under  the  life  of  history 
and  fate;  an  ethic  of  natural  and  acquired  reactions  that  polite  society  to-day 
would  call  ‘'the  instincts  of  a gentleman”;  an  ethic  of  which  vulgarity  and 
not  sin  is  the  antithesis.  Once  again  it  is  the  Castle  versus  the  Cathedral. 
The  castle  character  does  not  ask  about  precepts  and  reasons.  In  fact,  it  does 
not  ask  questions  at  all.  Its  code  lies  in  the  blood  — which  is  pulse  — and  its 
fear  is  not  of  punishment  or  requital,  but  of  contempt  and  especially  self-con- 
tempt. It  is  not  selfless;  on  the  contrary,  it  springs  from  the  very  fullness  of  a 
strong  self.  But  Compassion  likewise  demands  inward  greatness  of  soul,  and 
so  if  is  those  selfsame  Springtimes  that  produce  the  most  saintly  servants  of 
pity,  the  Francis  of  Assisi,  the  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  in  whom  renunciation  was 
a pervading  fragrance,  to  whom  self-offering  was  bliss,  whose  caritas  was  ethe- 
real, bloodless,  timeless,  historyless,  in  whom  fear  of  the  universe  had  dissolved 
itself  into  pure,  flawless  love,  a summit  of  causal  moral  of  which  Late  periods 
are  simply  no  longer  capable. 

To  constrain  one's  blood,  one  must  have  blood.  Consequently  it  is  only  in 
knightly  warrior-times  that  we  find  a monasticism  of  the  great  style,  and  the 
highest  symbol  for  the  complete  victory  of  Space  over  Time  is  the  warrior 
become  ascetic  — not  the  born  dreamer  and  weakling,  who  belongs  by  nature 
to  the  cloister,  nor  again  the  scholar,  who  works  at  a moral  system  in  the 
study.  Putting  cant  aside,  that  which  is  called  moral  to-day  — a proper  affec- 
tion for  one's  nearest,  or  the  exercise  of  worthy  inclinations,  or  the  practice  of 


174  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

caritas  with  an  arrure-fensk  of  acquiring  political  power  by  that  means  — is 
not  honour-moral,  or  even  a low  grade  of  it,  according  to  Springtime  stand- 
ards. To  repeat:  there  is  grand  moral  only  with  reference  to  death,  and  its 
sources  are  a fear,  pervading  the  whole  waking-consciousness,  of  metaphysical 
causes  and  consequences,  a love  that  overcomes  life,  a consciousness  that  one 
is  under  the  inexorable  magic  of  a causal  system  of  sacred  laws  and  purposes, 
which  are  honoured  as  truths  and  which  one  must  either  wholly  belong  to  or 
wholly  renounce.  Constant  tension,  self-watching,  self-testing,  accompany 
the  exercise  of  this  moral,  which  is  an  art,  and  in  the  presence  of  which  the 
world-as-history  sinks  to  nothingness.  Let  a man  be  either  a hero  or  a saint. 
In  between  lies,  not  wisdom,  but  banality. 

II 

If  there  were  truths  independent  of  the  currents  of  being,  there  could  be  no 
history  of  truths.  If  there  were  one  single  eternally  right  religion,  religious 
history  would  be  an  inconceivable  idea.  But,  however  highly  developed  the 
microcosmic  side  of  an  individuaFs  life  may  be,  it  is  nevertheless  something 
stretched  like  a membrane  over  the  developing  life,  perfused  by  the  pulsing 
blood,  ever  betraying  the  hidden  drive  of  cosmic  directedness.  Race  dominates 
and  forms  all  apprehension.  It  is  the  destiny  of  each  moment  of  awareness  to 
be  a cast  of  Time's  net  over  Space. 

Not  that  “eternal  truths”  do  not  exist.  Every  man  possesses  them  — 
plenty  of  them  — to  the  extent  that  he  exists  and  exercises  the  understanding 
faculty  in  a world  of  thoughts,  in  the  connected  ensemble  of  which  they  are,  in 
and  for  the  instant  of  thought,  unalterable  fixtures ironbound  as  cause- 
eifect  combinations  in  hoops  of  premisses  and  conclusions.  Nothing  in  this 
disposition  can  become  displaced,  he  believes.  But  in  reality  it  is  just  me  surge 
of  life  that  is  lifting  his  waking  self  and  its  world  together.  Its  unity  remains 
integral,  but  as  a unit,  a whole,  a fact^  it  has  a history.  Absolute  and  relative 
are  to  one  another  as  transverse  and  longitudinal  sections  of  a succession  of 
generations,  the  latter  ignoring  Space,  and  the  former  Time.  The  systematic 
thinker  stays  in  the  causal  order  of  a moment;  only  the  physiognomist  who 
reviews  the  sequence  of  positions  realizes  the  constant  alteration  of  that  which 
“is”  true. 

Alles  VergdngUche  ist  nur  ein  Gleichnis  holds  good  for  the  eternal  truths  also, 
as  soon  as  we  follow  their  course  in  the  stream  of  history,  and  watch  them  move 
on  as  elements  in  the  world-picture  of  the  generations  that  live  and  die.  For 
each  man,  during  the  short  space  of  his  existence,  the  one  religion  is  eternal  and 
true  which  Destiny,  through  the  time  and  place  of  his  birth,  has  ordained  for 
him.  With  it  he  feels,  out  of  it  he  forms,  the  views  and  convictions  of  his  days. 
To  its  words  and  forms  he  holds  fast,  although  what  he  means  by  them  is 
constantly  changing.  In  the  world-as-nature  there  are  eternal  truths;  in  the 
world-as-history  there  is  an  eternally  changing  trueness. 


PYTHAGORAS;  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  175 

: A mwphdo'^:  of.  fdigkus  history,  therefore,  is  a task  that  the  Faustian  spirit  ; 
alone  conM  C¥er  fornmlate,  and  one  that  it  is  only  now,  at  this  present  stage  of 
its  dcvelopnient,  fit  to  deal  with.  The  problem  is  enunciated,  and  we  must  dare 
the  effort  of  getting  completely  away  from  our  own  convictions  and  seeing  before 
us  everything  indifferently  as  equally  alien.  And  how  hard  it  is ! He  who  un- 
dertakes the  task  must  possess  the  strength  not  merely  to  imagine  himself  in  an 
illusory  detachment  from  the  truths  of  his  world-understanding  — illusory 
even  to  one  for  whom  truths  are  just  a set  of  concepts  and  methods  — but 
actually  to  penetrate  his  own  system  physiognomically  to  its  very  last  cells. 
And  even  then  is  it  possible,  in  a single  language,  which  structurally  and 
spiritually  carries  the  whole  metaphysical  content  of  its  own  Culture,  to  capture 
transmissible  ideas  of  the  truths  of  other-tongued  men? 

There  is,  to  begin  with,  over  the  thousands  of  years  of  the  first  age, ^ the 
colourless  throng  of  primitive  populations,  which  stand  fearfully  agape  in  the 
presence  of  the  chaotic  environment,  whose  enigmas  continually  weigh  upon 
them,  for  no  man  amongst  them  is  able  logically  to  master  it.  Lucky  in  com- 
parison with  them  is  the  animal,  who  is  awake  and  yet  not  thinking.  An 
animal  knows  fear  only  from  case  to  case,  whereas  early  man  trembles  before  the 
whole  world.  Everything  inside  and  outside  him  is  dark  and  unresolved.  The 
everyday  and  the  daemonic  are  tangled  together  without  clue  and  without  rule. 
The  day  is  filled  with  a frightened  and  painful  religiousness,  in  which  it  is  rare 
to  find  even  the  suggestion  of  a religion  of  confidence  — for  from  this  elemen- 
tary form  of  the  world-fear  no  way  leads  to  the  understanding  love.  Every 
stone  on  which  a man  stumbles,  every  tool  that  he  takes  in  his  hand,  every  insect 
buzzing  past  him,  food,  house,  weather,  all  can  be  daemonic;  but  the  man  be- 
lieves in  the  powers  that  lurk  in  them  only  so  long  as  he  is  frightened  or  so  long 
as  he  uses  them  — there  are  quite  enough  of  them  even  so.  But  one  can  love 
something  only  if  one  believes  in  its  continued  existence.  Love  presupposes  the 
thought  of  a world-order  that  has  acquired  stability.  Western  research  has 
been  at  great  pains,  not  only  to  set  in  order  individual  observations  gathered 
from  all  parts  of  the  world,  but  to  arrange  them  according  to  assumed  gradations 
that  “lead  up”  from  animism  (or  other  beginnings,  as  you  please)  to  the  be- 
liefs that  it  holds  itself.  Unfortunately,  it  is  one  particular  religion  that  has 
provided  the  values  of  the  scheme,  and  Chinese  or  Greeks  would  have  built 
it  quite  differently.  In  reality  no  such  gradation,  leading  a general  human 
evolution  up  to  one  goal,  exists.  Primitive  man’s  chaotic  world-around,  born 
of  his  discontinuous  understanding  of  separate  moments  and  yet  full  of  impres- 
sive meaning,  is  always  something  grown-up,  self-complete,  and  closed  off, 
often  with  chasms  and  terrors  of  deep  metaphysical  premonition.  Always 
it  contains  a system,  and  it  matters  little  whether  this  is  partially  abstracted 
from  the  contemplation  of  the  light-world  or  remains  wholly  within  it.  Such 


z76  ; THE  DECLINE  OF' THE  WEST 

a world-picture  does  not  ‘‘progress’*;  nor  is  it  a fixed  sum  of  particulars  from 
which  this  one  and  that  one  ought  to  be  (though  usually  they  are)  picked  out 
for  comparison  irrespective  of  time,  land,  and  people.  In  reality  they  form  a 
world  of  organic  religions ^ which,  all  over  the  world,  possessed  (and,  where  they 
linger,  still  possess)  proper  and  very  significant  modes  of  originating,  growing, 
expanding,  and  fading  out,  and  a well-established  specific  character  in  point  of 
structure,  style,  tempo,  and  duration.  The  religions  of  the  high  Cultures  are 
not  developed  from  these,  but  different.  They  lie  clearer  and  more  intellectual 
in  the  light,  they  know  what  understanding  love  means,  they  have  problems 
and  ideas,  theories  and  techniques,  of  strict  intellect,  but  the  religious  symbol- 
ism of  everyday  light  they  know  no  more.  The  primitive  religiousness  pene- 
trates everything;  the  later  and  individualized  religions  are  self-contained 
form-worlds  of  their  own. 

All  the  more  enigmatic,  therefore,  are  the  “ pre-”  periods  of  the  grand 
Cultures,  still  primitive  through  and  through,  and  yet  more  and  more  distinctly 
anticipating  and  pointing  in  a definite  direction.  It  is  just  these  periods,  of 
some  centuries’  duration,  that  ought  to  have  been  accurately  examined  and  com- 
pared amongst  themselves  and  for  themselves.  In  what  shape  does  the  coming 
phenomenon  prepare  itself?  In  the  case  of  the  Magian  religions  the  threshold 
period,  as  we  have  seen,  produced  the  type  of  the  Prophetic  religion,  which 
led  up  to  the  Apocalyptic.  How  comes  it  that  this  particular  form  is  more 
deeply  grounded  in  the  essence  of  this  particular  Culture?  Or  why  is  it  that  the 
Mycenaean  prelude  of  the  Classical  is  filled  from  one  end  to  the  other  with 
imaginings  of  beast-formed  deities?  ^ They  are  not  the  gods  of  the  warriors 
up  in  the  megaron  of  the  Mycenaean  castle,  where  soul-  and  ancestor-worship 
was  practised  with  a high  and  noble  piety  evidenced  still  in  the  monuments, 
but  the  gods  of  down  below,  the  powers  believed  in  in  the  peasant’s  hut.  The 
great  menlike  gods  of  the  Apollinian  religion,  which  must  have  arisen  about 
iioo  out  of  a mighty  religious  upheaval,  bear  traces  of  their  dark  past  on  all 
sides.  Hardly  one  of  these  figures  is  without  some  cognomen,  attribute,  or 
telltale  transformation-myth  indicative  of  its  origin.  To  Homer  Hera  is  in- 
variably the  cow-eyed;  Zeus  appears  as  a bull,  and  the  Poseidon  of  the  Thelpusan 

^ Was  it  that  highly  civilized  Crete,  the  outpost  of  Egyptian  modes  of  thought,  afforded  a 
pattern  (sec  p.  87)?  But,  after  all,  the  numerous  local  and  tribal  gods  of  the  primitive  Thinite  time 
(before  3000),  which  represented  the  numina  of  particular  htSiSt'genera^  were  essentially  different 
in  meaning.  The  more  powerful  the  Egyptian  deity  of  this  preliminary  period  is,  the  more  par- 
ticular individual  spirits  (ka)  and  individual  souls  (bat)  he  possesses,  and  these  hide  and  lurk  in 
the  various  animals  — Bastet  in  the  cat,  Sechmet  in  the  lion,  Hathor  in  the  cow,  Mut  in  the  vul- 
ture (hence  the  human-formed  ka  that  figures  behind  the  beast-head  in  the  figures  of  the  gods)  — 
making  of  this  earliest  world-picture  a very  abortion  of  monstrous  fear,  filling  it  with  powers  which 
rage  against  man  even  after  his  death  and  which  only  the  greatest  sacrifices  avail  to  placate-  The 
union  of  the  North  and  the  South  lands  was  represented  by  the  common  veneration  of  the  Horus- 
falcoa,  whose  first  ka  resided  in  the  Pharaoh  of  the  time.  C£.  Eduard  Meyer,  Gesch,  d.  Alt.^  I,  §§  182., 
et  seq.  [See  also  Motet  and  Davy:  Das  clans  aux  empires  and  Motet:  Le  Nil  et  la  civilisation  egyptieme 
(available  in  English  translations).  — Tr.] 


■ PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL'  : 177 

legend  as  a horse.  Apollo  comes  to  be  the  name  for  countless  primitive  numina; 
now  he  was  wolf  (Lycasus)  like  the  Roman  Mars,  now  dolphin  (Delphinius), 
and  now  serpent  (the  Pythian  Apollo  of  Delphi).  A serpent,  too,  is  the  form 
of  Zeus  Meilichios  on  Attic  grave-reliefs  and  of  Asclepios,  and  of  the  Furies  even 
in  iEschylus;  ^ and  the  sacred  snake  kept  on  the  Acropolis  was  interpreted  as 
Erichthonios.  In  Arcadia  the  horse-headed  figure  of  Demeter  in  the  temple  of 
Phigalia  was  still  to  be  seen  by  Pausanias;  the  Arcadian  Artemis-Gallisto 
appears  as  a she-bear,  but  in  Athens  too  the  priestesses  of  Artemis  Brauronia 
were  called  (bears).-  Dionysus  — now  a bull,  now  a stag  — and  Pan 

retained  a certain  beast-element  to  the  end.  Psyche  (like  the  Egyptian  corporal- 
soul,  baf)  is  the  soul-bird.  And  upon  all  this  supervened  the  innumerable  semi- 
animal figures  like  sirens  and  centaurs  that  completely  fill  up  the  Early  Classical 
nature-picture.® 

But  what  are  the  features,  now,  of  the  primitive  religion  of  Merovingian 
times  that  foreshadow  the  mighty  uprising  of  the  Gothic  that  was  at  hand? 
That  both  are  ostensibly  the  same  religion,  Christianity,  proves  nothing  when 
we  consider  the  entire  difference  in  their  deeps.  For  (we  must  be  quite  clear  in 
our  own  mind  on  this)  the  primitive  character  of  a religion  does  not  lie  in  its 
stock  of  doctrines  and  usages,  but  in  the  specific  spirituality  of  the  mankind 
that  adopts  them  and  feels,  speaks,  and  thinks  with  them.  The  student  has  to 
familiarize  himself  with  the  fact  that  primitive  Christianity  (more  exactly,  the 
early  Christianity  of  the  Western  Church)  has  twice  subsequently  become  the 
expression- vehicle  of  a primitive  piety,  and  therefore  itself  a primitive  religion 
— namely,  in  the  Celtic-Germanic  West  between  500  and  900,  and  in  Russia  up 
to  this  day.  Now,  how  did  the  world  mirror  itself  to  these  ** converted’* 
minds?  Leaving  out  of  account  some  few  clerics  of,  say,  Byzantine  education, 
what  did  one  actually  think  and  imagine  about  these  ceremonies  and  dogmas. 
Bishop  Gregory  of  Tours,  who,  we  must  remember,  represents  the  highest 
intellectual  outlook  of  his  generation,  once  lauded  the  powder  rubbed  from  a 
saint’s  tombstone  in  these  words:  divine  purgative,  superior  to  all  doctors* 

recipes,  which  cleanses  the  belly  like  scammony  and  washes  away  all  stains 
from  our  conscience!”  For  him  the  death  of  Jesus  was  a crime  which  filled 
with  indignation,  but  no  more;  the  Resurrection,  on  the  contrary,  which 
hovered  before  him  vaguely,  he  felt  deep  down  as  an  athletic  tour  de  force  that 
stamped  the  Messiah  as  the  grand  wizard  and  $0  legitimated  him  as  the  true 
Saviour.  Of  any  mystic  meaning  in  the  story  of  the  Passion  he  has  not  an 
inkling.^ 

^ EumenideSi  1x6.  , 

2 Moreover,  in  the  full  maturity  of  Athens,  every  little  girl  of  the  upper  classes  was  consecrated 
as  a bear  to  this  Artemis.  — Tr. 

^ For  further  information  the  reader  may  consult  the  articles  “Dcmeter,”  etc.,  in  the  Ency, 
Brit.,  XI  ed.;  and,  for  a suggestive  introduction  in  the  fewest  possible  words.  Dr.  Jane'  Harrison’s 
pamphlet,  Myths  of  Greece  and  Rome.  — Tr. 

^ Bernoulli,  Die  Heiligen  der  Mjerowinger  (1900)  ^ a good  account  of  this  primitive  religion. 


zyS:  '.THE  ■DECLmE  OF  THE  WEST, 

la  Russia  the  conclusions  of  the  ‘‘Synod  of  a Hundred  Chapters/*  of  15515 
evidence  a wholly  primitive  order  of  belief.  Shaving  of  the  beard  and  wrong 
handling  of  the  cross  both  figure  here  as  deadly  sins  — they  were  affronts  to 
the  daemons.  The“  Synod  of  Antichrist,**  of  1667,  led  to  the  vast  secession  of 
the  Raskol  movement,  because  thenceforward  the  sign  of  the  cross  was  to  be 
made  with  three  fingers  instead  of  two,  and  the  name  “Jesus**  was  to  be  pro- 
nounced “yissus**  instead  of  “Issus**  — whereby,  for  the  strict  believer,  the 
power  of  this  magic  over  the  demons  would  be  lost. ^ But  this  effect  of  fear  is, 
after  all,  not  the  only  one  nor  even  the  most  potent.  Why  is  it  that  the  Merovin- 
gian period  shows  not  the  slightest  trace  of  that  glowing  inwardness  and 
longing  to  sink  into  the  metaphysical  that  suffuses  the  Magian  seed-time  of 
Apocalyptic  and  the  closely  analogous  period  of  the  Holy  Synod  (17x1-1917)  in 
Russia?  What  was  it  that  from  Peter  the  Great *s  time  on  led  all  those  martyr- 
sects  of  the  Raskolniki  to  celibacy,  poverty,  pilgrimage/ self-mutilation,  and 
asceticism  in  its  most  fearful  forms,  and  in  the  seventeenth  century  had  driven 
thousands,  in  religious  frenzy,  to  throw  themselves  en  masse  into  the  flames? 
The  doctrines  of  the  Chlysti,  with  their  “Russian  Christs’*  (of  whom  seven 
are  counted  so  far);  the  Dukhobors  with  their  Book  of  Life,  which  they  use  as 
their  Bible  and  hold  to  contain  psalms  df  Jesus  orally  transmitted;  the  Skoptsi 
with  their  ghastly  mutilation-precepts  — manifestations,  one  and  all,  of  some- 
thing without  which  Tolstoi,  Nihilism,  and  the  political  revolutions  are  in- 
comprehensible ^ — how  is  it  that  in  comparison  the  Frankish  period  seems  so 
dull  and  shallow?  Is  it  that  only  Aramaeans  and  Russians  possess  religious 
genius  — and,  if  so,  what  have  we  to  expect  of  the  Russia  that  is  to  come,  now 
that  (just  in  the  decisive  centuries)  the  obstacle  of  scholarly  orthodoxy  has 
been  destroyed? 

. ' HI  ' 

Primitive  religions  have  something  homeless  about  them,  like  the  clouds 
and  the  wind.  The  mass-souls  of  the  proto-peoples  have  accidentally  and 
fugitively  condensed  into  one  being,  and  accidental,  therefore,  is  and  remains 
the where” — which  is  an  “ anywhere”  ~ of  the  linkages  of  waking-con- 
sciousness arising  from  the  fear  and  defensiveness  that  spread  over  them. 
Whether  they  stay  or  move  on,  whether  they  alter  or  not,  is  immaterial  so  far 
as  concerns  their  inward  significance. 

From  life  of  this  order  the  high  Cultures  arc  separated  by  a deep  soil-bound- 
ness.  Here  there  is  a mother-landscape  behind  all  expression-forms,  and  just 
as  the  State,  as  temple  and  pyramid  and  cathedral,  must  fulfil  their  history  there 
where  their  idea  originated,  so  too  the  great  religion  of  every  Springtime  is 

^ For  an  account  of  Russian  sectarian  movements  sec  A.  P.  Stanley,  Hist,  of  the  Eastern  Chmrchj 
for  a summary,  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.,  VoL  XXIH,  p.  886.  — Tr. 

2 Kattenbusch,  Lehrb.  d.  vgl.  KonfessionsL,  I (1892.),  pp.  X34,  ct  scq.;  N.  P.  Milyukov,  Skhx- 
russ.  Kulturg.  (1901)  11,  pp.  104,  ct  scq. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  vj^ 

bound  hj  all  the  roots  of  its  being  to  the  land  over  which  its  world-image  has 
risen.  Sacral  practices  and  dogmas  may  be  carried  far  and  wide,  but  their 
inner  evolution  stays  spellbound  in  the  place  of  their  birth.  It  is  simply  an 
impossibility  that  the  slightest  trace  df  evolution  of  Classical  city-cults  should 
be  found  in  Gaul,  or  a dogmatic  advance  of  Faustian  Christianity  in  America. 
Whatever  disconnects  itself  from  the  land  becomes  rigid  and  hard. 

It  begins,  in  every  case,  like  a great  cry.  The  dull  confusedness  of  terror  and 
defence  suddenly  passes  into  a pure  awakening  of  inwardness  that  blossoms  up, 
wholly  plantwise,  from  mother  earth,  and  sees  and  comprehends  the  depth  of 
the  light-world  with  one  outlook.  Wherever  introspectiveness  exists  as  a living 
sense,  this  change  is  felt  and  welcomed  as  an  inward  rebirth.  In  this  moment 
— never  earlier,  and  never  (at  least  with  the  same  deep  intensity)  later  — it 
traverses  the  chosen  spirits  of  the  time  like  a grand  light,  which  dissolves  all 
fear  in  blissful  love  and  lets  the  invisible  appear,  all  suddenly,  in  a metaphysical 
radiance. 

Every  Culture  actualizes  here  its  prime  symbol.  Each  has  its  own  sort 
of  love  — we  may  call  it  heavenly  or  metaphysical  as  we  choose  with 
which  it  contemplates,  comprehends,  and  takes  into  itself  its  godhead,  and 
which  remains  to  every  other  Culture  inaccessible  or  unmeaning.  Whether  the 
world  be  something  set  under  a domed  light-cavern,  as  it  was  for  Jesus  and  his 
companions,  or  just  a vanishingly  small  bit  of  a star-filled  infinity,  as  Giordano 
Bruno  felt  it;  whether  the  Orphics  take  their  bodily  god  into  themselves,  or 
the  spirit  of  Plotinus,  soaring  in  ecstasy,  fuses  in  henosis  with  the  spirit  of  God, 
or  St.  Bernard  in  his  “mystic  union’*  becomes  one  with  the  operation  of  infinite 
deity  — the  deep  urge  of  the  soul  is  governed  always  by  the  prime  symbol  of  the 
particular  Culture  and  of  no  other. 

In  the  Vth  Dynasty  of  Egypt  (x68o~i54o),  which  followed  that  of  the  great 
pyramid-builders,  the  cult  of  the  Horus-falcon,  whose  ka  dwelt  in  the  reigning 
monarch,  faded.  The  old  local  cults  and  even  the  profound  Thot  religion 
of  Hermopolis  fell  into  the  background.  The  sun-religion  of  Re  appears. 
Out  from  his  palace  westward  every  king  erects  a Re-sanctuary  by  his  tomb- 
temple,  the  latter  a symbol  of  a life  directional  from  birth  to  sarcophagus- 
chamber,  the  former  a symbol  of  grand  and  eternal  nature.  Time  and  Space^ 
being  and  waking-being.  Destiny  and  sacred  Causality  are  set  face  to  face  in 
this  mighty  twin-creation  as  in  no  other  architecture  in  the  world.  To  both  a 
covered  way  leads  up;  that  to  the  Re  is  accompanied  by  reliefs  figuring  the 
power  of  the  sun-god  over  the  plant  and  animal  worlds  and  the  changings  of 
seasons.  No  god-image,  no  temple,  but  only  an  altar  of  alabaster  adorns  the 
mighty  terrace  on  which  at  day-break,  high  above  the  land,  the  Pharaoh  ad- 
vances out  of  the  darkness  to  greet  the  great  god  who  is  rising  up  in  the  East.^ 

^ Borchardt,  'KeheiUgtum  des  Newoserr^,  I The  Pharaoh  is  no  longer  an  incarnation  of 

godhead,  and  not  yet,  as  the  theology  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  was  to  make  him,  the  son  of  Re; 
notwithstanding  ail  earthly  greatness,  he  is  small,  a servant,  as  he  stands  before  the  god. 


i8o  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  • 

This  youthful  inwardaess  proceeds  always  out  of  a towuless  country-side, 
our  of  villages,  hovels,  sanctuaries,  solitary  cloisters,  and  herinitages.  Here  is 
formed  the  community  of  high  awareness,  of  the  spiritual  elect,  which  in- 
wardly is  separated  by  a whole  world' from  the  great  being-currents  of  the 
heroic  and  the  knightly.  The  two  prime  estates,  priesthood  and  nobility  — 
contemplation  in  the  cathedral  and  deeds  before  the  castles,  askesis  and 
ecstasy  and  high-bred  custom  — begin  their  special  histories  from  this  point. 
Though  the  Caliph  was  also  worldly  ruler  of  the  faithful,  though  the  Pharaoh 
sacrificed  in  both  holy  places,  though  the  German  King  built  his  family  vault 
under  the  cathedral,  nothing  gets  rid  of  the  abyssal  opposition  of  Time  and  Space 
that  is  reflected  in  the  contrast  of  these  two  social  orders.  Religious  history  and 
political  history,  the  histories  of  truths  and  facts,  stand  opposed  and  irrecon- 
cilable. Their  opposition  begins  in  cathedral  and  castle,  it  propagates  itself  in 
the  ever-growing  towns  as  the  opposition  of  wisdom  and  business,  and  in  the 
last  stages  of  historical  capacity  it  closes  as  a wrestle  of  intellect  and  power. 

But  both  these  movements  take  place  on  the  heights  of  humanity.  Peasant- 
dom  remains  historyless  under  it  all,  comprehending  politics  as  little  as  it 
understands  dogmatics.  Out  of  the  strong  young  religion  of  saintly  groups, 
scholasticism  and  mysticism  develop  in  the  early  towns;  reformation,  philoso- 
phy, and  worldly  learning  in  the  increasing  tumult  of  streets  and  squares; 
enlightenment  and  irreligion  in  the  stone  masses  of  the  late  megalopolis.  The 
beliefs  of  the  peasant  outside  remain  ‘‘eternaF’  and  always  the  same.  The 
Egyptian  hind  understood  nothing  of  this  Re.  He  heard  the  name,  but  while  a 
grand  chapter  of  religious  history  was  passing  over  his  head  in  the  cities,  he 
went  on  worshipping  the  old  Thinite  beast-gods,  until  with  the  XXVIth 
Dynasty  and  its  fellah-religion  they  regained  supremacy.  The  Italian  peasant 
prayed  in  Augustus’s  time  just  as  he  had  done  long  before  Homer  and  as  he  does 
to-day.  Names  and  dogmas  of  big  religions,  blossoming  and  dying  in  turn, 
have  penetrated  to  him  from  the  towns  and  have  altered  the  sounds  of  his  words 
— but  the  meaning  remains  ever  the  same.  The  French  peasant  lives  still  in  the 
Merovingian  Age.  Freya  or  Mary,  Druids  or  Dominicans,  Rome  or  Geneva  — 
nothing  touches  the  innermost  kernel  of  his  beliefs. 

But  even  in  the  towns  one  stratum  hangs  back,  historically,  relatively  to 
another.  Over  the  primitive  religion  of  the  country-side  there  is  another 
popular  religion,  that  of  the  small  people  in  the  underground  of  the  towns  and 
in  the  provinces.  The  higher  a Culture  rises  — Middle  Kingdom,  Brahman 
period,  Pre-Socratics,  Pre-Confucians,  Baroque  — the  narrower  becomes  the 
circle  of  those  who  possess  the  final  truths  of  their  time  as  reality  and  not  as 
mere  name  and  sound.  How  many  of  those  who  lived  with  Socrates,  Augustine, 
and  Pascal  understood  them?  In  religion  as  otherwise  the  human  pyramid  rises 
with  increasing  sharpness,  till  at  the  end  of  the  Culture  it  is  complete  — there^ 
after,  bit  by  bit,  to  crumble. 


PYTHAGORAS,,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  z8i 

About  3000  in  Eg7pt  and  Babylon  two  great  religions  began  their  life- 
courses.  In  Egypt  the  “reformation”  period  at  the  end  of  the  Old  Kingdom 
saw  solar  nionotbcisin  firmly  founded  as  the  religion  of  priests  and  educated 
persons.  Ail  other  gods  and  goddesses  — whom  the  peasantry  and  the  humble 
people  continued  to  worship  in  their  foiher  meaning-- are  now  only  in- 
carnations or  servants  of  the  one  Re.  Even  the  particular  religion  of  Hermop- 
olis,  with  its  cosmology,  was  adapted  to  the  grand  system,  and  a theological 
negotiation  brought  even  the  Ptah  of  Memphis  into  harmony  with  dogma 
as  an  abstract  prime-principle  of  creation.^  Exactly  as  in  the  times  of  Justinian 
and  Charles  V,  the  city-spirit  asserted  mastery  over  the  soul  of  the  land;  the 
formative  power  of  the  Springtime  had  come  to  an  end;  the  dogma  was  es- 
sentially complete,  and  its  subsequent  treatment  by  rational  processes  took 
down  more  of  the  structure  than  it  improved.  Philosophy  began.  In  respect 
of  dogma,  the  Middle  Kingdom  was  as  unimportant  as  the  Baroque. 

From  1500  three  new  religious  histories  begin  — first  the  Vedic  in  the 
Punjab,  then  the  Early  Chinese  in  the  Hwang-ho,  and  lastly  the  Classical  on 
the  north  of  the  ^gean  Sea.  Distinctly  as  the  Classical  man's  world-picture 
and  his  prime  symbol  of  the  unit  body  is  presented  to  us,  it  is  difficult  even  to 
guess  the  details  of  the  great  Early  Classical  religion.  For  this  lacuna  we  have 
to  thank  the  Homeric  poems,  which  hinder  rather  than  help  us  in  compre- 
hending it.  The  new  notion  of  godhead  that  was  the  special  ideal  of  this  Culture 
is  the  human-formed  body  in  the  light,  the  hero  as  mediator  between  man  and 
god  so  much,  at  any  rate,  the  Iliad  evidences.  This  body  might  be  light- 
transfigured  by  Apollo  or  disjected  to  the  winds  by  Dionysus,  but  in  every  case 
it  was  the  basic  form  of  Being.  The  (rw^a  as  ideal  of  the  extended,  the  cosmos 
as  sum  of  these  unit  bodies,  “Being”  and  “the  one*’  as  the  extended-in-itsclf 
and  “Logos”  ^ as  the  order  thereof  in  the  light  — all  this  came  up  before  the 
eyes  of  priest-men,  grandly  visible  and  having  the  full  force  of  a new  religion. 

But  the  Homeric  poetry  is  purely  aristocratic.  Of  the  two  worlds  — that  of 
the  noble  and  that  of  the  priest,  that  of  Taboo  and  that  of  Totem,  that  of 
heroism  and  that  of  sanctity  — only  the  one  is  here  living.  It  not  only  does 
not  understand,  but  actually  despises,  the  other.  As  in  the  Edda,  so  in  Homer, 
it  is  the  greatest  glory  of  an  immortal  to  know  the  way  and  code  of  nobility. 
The  thinkers  of  the  Classical  Baroque,  from  Xenophanes  to  Plato,  regarded 
these  scenes  of  god-life  as  impudent' and  trivial,  and  they  were  right;  they  felt 
exactly  as  the  theology  and  philosophy  of  the  later  West  felt  about  the 
Germanic  hero-sagas  and  even  about  Gottfried  of  Strassburg,  Wolfram,  and 
Walther.  If  the  Homeric  epics  did  not  vanish  as  the  hero-songs  collected  by 
Charlemagne  vanished,  it  was  only  because  there  was  no  fully  formed  Classical 

^ Erman,  Ein  Denkmal  memphitsiche  Theplogie*'  Ber.  Berk  Ak.  (1911),  pp.  916,  et  seq. 

2 Not,  of  course,  to  be  connected  in  any  profound  sense  with  that  which  emerged  under  the  name 
in  the  Magian  Culture.  — Tr. 


iBz  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

priesthood,  with  the  result  that  the  Classical  cities,  when  they  arose,  were 
intellectually  dominated  by  a knightly  and  not  a religious  literature.  The 
original  doctrines  of  this  religion,  which  out  of  opposition  to  Homer  linked 
themselves  with  the  (probably)  still  older  name  of  Orpheus,  were  never  written 
'down.' 

All  the  same,  they  existed.  Who  knows  what  and  how  much  is  hidden  be- 
hind the  figures  of  Calchas  and  Tiresias?  A mighty  upheaval  there  must  have 
been  at  the  beginning  of  this  Culture,  as  at  that  of  others  an  upheaval  extend- 
ing from  the  iEgean  Sea  as  far  as  Etruria  — but  the  Iliad  shows  as  few  signs  of  it 
as  the  lays  of  the  Nibelungs  and  of  Roland  show  of  the  inwardness  and  mysticism 
of  Joachim  of  Floris,  St.  Francis,  and  the  Crusades,  or  of  the  inner  fire  of  that 
Dies  Ira  of  Thomas  of  Celano,  which  would  probably  have  excited  mirth  at  a 
thirteenth-century  court  of  love.  Great  personalities  there  must  have  been  to 
give  a mystical-metaphysical  form  to  the  new  world-outlook,  but  we  know 
nothing  of  them  and  it  is  only  the  gay,  bright,  easy  side  of  it  that  passed  into 
the  song  of  knightly  halls.  Was  the  “Trojan  War  ” a feud,  or  was  it  also  a 
Crusade?  What  is  the  meaning  of  Helen?  Even  the  Fall  of  Jerusalem  has  been 
looked  at  from  a worldly  point  of  view  as  well  as  from  a spiritual. 

In  the  nobles’  poetry  of  Homer,  Dionysus  and  Demeter,  as  priests*  gods,  are 
unhonoured.  ^ But  even  in  Hesiod,  the  herdsman  of  Ascra,  the  enthusiast- 
searcher  inspired  by  his  folk-beliefs,  the  ideas  of  the  great  early  time  are  not  to 
be  found  pure,  any  more  than  in  Jakob  Bohme  the  cobbler.®  That  is  the  second 
difficulty.  The  great  early  religions^  too^  were  the  possession  of  a class y and  neither 
aGCessible  to  nor  understandable  by  the  generality;  the  mysticism  of  earliest 
Gothic,  too,  was  confined  to  small  elect  circles,  sealed  by  Latin  and  the  diffi- 
culty of  its  concepts  and  figures,  and  neither  nobility  nor  peasantry  had  any 
distinct  idea  of  its  existence.  And  excavation,  therefore,  important  as  it  is  in 
respect  of  the  Classical  country-faiths,  can  tell  us  as  little  about  the  Early 
Classical  religion  as  a village  church  can  tell  us  about  Abelard  or  Bonaven- 
tura. 

But  iEschylus  and  Pindar,  at  any  rate,  were  under  the  spell  of  a great  priestly 
tradition,  and  before  them  there  were  the  Pythagoreans,  who  made  the  Demeter- 
cult  their  centre  (thereby  indicating  where  the  kernel  of  that  mythology  is  to 
be  sought),  and  earlier  still  were  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries  and  the  Orphic 
reformation  of  the  seventh  century;  and,  finally,  there  are  the  fragments  of 
Pherecydes  and  Epimenides,  who  were  not  the  first  but  the  last  dogmatists  of  a 
theology  in  reality  ancient.  The  idea  that  impiety  was  a heritable  sin,  visited 
upon  the  children  and  the  children’s  children,  was  known  to  Hesiod  and  Solon, 
as  well  as  the  doctrine  (Apollinian  also)  of  “Hybris.”  ^ Plato,  however,  as  an 

^ And  because  they  were  the  gods  of  the  eternal  peasant,  they  outlived  the  Olympians. 

2 Even  though  Hesiod  is  two  centuries  nearer  to  the  source  of  his  Culture  than  the  German 
mystic  is  to  that  of  our  own.  See  the  article  ‘^Boehme,’*  Bncy,  XI  cd.  — Tr. 

® Insolent  prosperity  tempting  Nemesis.  — Tr. 


\ ; PyTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  183 

Orpliie  opponent  of  the  Homeric  conception  of  life,  sets  forth  vef7  ancient 
doctrines  of  hell  and  the  judgment  of  the  dead  in  his  Fhado.  We  know  the 
tremendous  formula  of  Orphism,  the  Nay  of  the  mysteries  that  answered  the 
Yea  of  the  agon,  which  arose,  certainly  by  1100  at  latest,  as  a protest  of  Waking- 
Consciousness  against  Being  ~ <r%’a  that  splendid  Classical  body  a grave  ! 
Here  man  is  no  longer  feeling  himself  as  a thing  oL  breeding,  strength,  and 
movement;  he  kmws  himself  and  is  terrified  by  what  he  knows.  Here  begins 
the  Classical  askesis,  which  by  strictest  rites  and  expiations,  even  by  voluntary 
suicide,  seeks  deliverance  from  this  Euclidean  body-being,  It  is  an  entirely 
erroneous  interpretation  of  the  Pre-Socratics  to  suppose  that  it  was  from  the 
view-point  of  enlightenment  that  they  spoke  against  Homer.  It  was  as  ascetics 
that  they  did  so.  These  “contemporaries”  of  Descartes  and  Leibnk  were 
brought  up  in  the  strict  traditions  of  the  old  great  Orphism,  which  were  as 
faithfully  preserved  in  the  almost  claustral  meditation-schools  — old  and  famous 
holy  places  — as  Gothic  Scholasticism  was  treasured  in  the  wholly  intellectual 
universities  of  the  Baroque.  From  the  self-immolation  of  Empedocles  the  line 
runs  straight  forward  to  the  suicide  of  the  Roman  Stoic,  and  straight  back  to 
“Orpheus.” 

Out  of  these  last  surviving  traces,  however,  an  outline  of  the  Early  Classical 
religion  emerges  bright  and  distinct.  Just  as  all  Gothic  inwardness  directed 
itself  upon  Mary,  Queen  of  Heaven  and  Virgin  and  Mother,  so  in  that  moment 
of  the  Classical  World  there  arose  a garland  of  myths,  images,  and  figures 
around  Demeter,  the  bearing  mother,  around  Gaia  and  Persephone,  and  also 
Dionysus  the  begetter,  chthonian  Vand  phallic  cults,  festivals  and  mysteries  of 
birth  and  death.  All  this,  too,  was  characteristically  Classical,  conceived  under 
the  aspect  of  present  corporeality.  The  Apollinian  religion  venerated  body, 
the  Orphic  rejected  it,  that  of  Demeter  celebrated  the  moments  of  fertilization 
and  birth,  in  which  body  acquired  being.  There  was  a mysticism  that  reverently 
honoured  the  secret  of  life,  in  doctrine,  symbol,  and  mime,  but  side  by  side  with 
it  there  was  orgiasm  too,  for  the  squandering  of  the  body  is  as  deeply  and 
closely  akin  to  asceticism  as  sacred  prostitution  is  to  celibacy  — both,  all,  are 
negations  of  time.  It  is  the  reverse  of  the  Apollinian  “halt!”  that  checks  on 
the  threshold  of  Hybris;  detachment  is  not  kept,  but  flung  away.  He  who  has 
experienced  these  things  in  his  soul  has  “from  being  a mortal  become  a god.” 
In  those  days  there  must  have  been  great  saints  and  seers  who  towered  as  far 
above  the  figures  of  Heraclitus  and  Empedocles  as  the  latter  above  the  itinerant 
teachers  of  Cynicism  and  Stoicism  — things  of  this  order  do  not  happen  name- 
lessly  and  impersonally.  As  the  songs  of  Achilles  and  Odysseus  were  dying 
down  everywhere,  a grand,  strict  doctrine  arose  at  the  famous  old  cult-places, 
a mysticism  and  scholasticism  with  developed  educational  methods  and  a secret 

^ The  work  of  J.  J.  Bachofen  in  this  field  has  recently  been  assembled  in  concentrated  form  under 
the  title  Mythus  von  Occident  und  Orient  — Tf. 


7S4  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ■ 

oral  traditioii,  as  in  India.  But  all  that  is  buried,  and  the  relics  of  the  later 
times  barely  suffice  to  prove  that  it  once  existed. 

By  putting  the  knightly  poetry  and  folk-cults  quite  aside,  then,  we  can 
even  now  determine  something  more  of  this  (the)  Classical  religion.  But  in  doing 
so  there  is  a third  pitfall  to  be  avoided  — the  opposing  of  Greek  religion  to 
Roman  religion.  For  ir^reality  there  was  no  such  opposition. 

Rome  is  only  ane  of  innumerable  city-states  that  arose  during  the  great 
epoch  of  colonization.  It  was  built  by  Etruscans.  From  the  religious  point 
of  view  it  was  re-created  under  the  Etruscan  dynasty  of  the  sixth  century,  and 
it  is  possible  indeed  that  the  Capitolinc  group  of  deities,  Jupiter,  Juno,  Mi- 
nerva— which  at  that  time  replaced  the  ancient  trinity,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Quirinus, 
of  the  ‘ * Numa’  * religion  — ■ was  in  some  way  connected  with  the  family  cult  of  the 
Tarquins,  in  which  case  Minerva,  as  goddess  of  the  city,  is  unmistakably  a copy 
of  Athene  PoHas.  ^ The  cults  of  this  single  city  are  properly  comparable  only  with 
those  of  individual  Greek-speaking  cities  of  the  same  degree  of  maturity,  say 
Sparta  or  Thebes,  which  were  in  nowise  more  colourful.  The  little  that  in  these 
latter  discloses  itself  as  generally  Hellenic  will  also  prove  to  be  generally 
Italian.  And  as  for  the  claim  that  the  “Roman*’  religion  is  distinguished  from 
that  of  the  Greek  city-states  by  the  absence  of  myth  — what  is  the  basis  of  our 
knowledge  on  the  point?  We  should  know  nothing  at  all  of  the  great  god-sagas 
of  the  Springtime  if  we  had  only  the  festival-calendar  and  the  public  cults  of 
the  Greek  city-states  to  go  upon,  just  as  we  should  learn  nothing  of  Jesus’s 
piety  from  the  proceedings  of  the  Council  of  Ephesus  or  of  that  of  St.  Francis 
from  a church  constitution  of  the  Reformation.  Menelaus  and  Helen  were 
for  the  Laconian  state-cult  tree-deities  and  nothing  more.  The  Classical  myth 
derives  from  a period  when  the  Poleis  with  their  festivals  and  sacral  constitu- 
tions were  not  yet  in  existence,  when  there  was  not  only  no  Rome,  but  no 
Athens.  With  the  religious  duties  and  notions  of  the  cities  — which  were 
eminently  rational  — it  has  no  connexion  at  all.  Indeed,  myth  and  cult  are 
even  less  in  touch  with  one  another  in  the  Classical  Culture  than  in  others. 
The  myth,  moreover,  is  in  no  way  a creation  of  the  Hellenic  culture-field  as  a 
whole  — it  is  not  “Greek”  — but  originated  (like  the  stories  of  Jesus’s  child- 
hood and  the  Grail  legend)  in  this  and  that  group,  quite  local,  under  pressure 
of  deep  inward  stirrings.  For  instance,  the  idea  of  Olympus  arose  in  Thessaly 
and  thence,  as  a common  property  of  all  educated  persons,  spread  out  to  Cyprus 
and  to  Etruria,  thus,  of  course,  involving  Rome.  Etruscan  painting  presupposes 
it  as  a thing  of  common  knowledge,  and  therefore  the  Tarquins  and  their 

^ Wissowa,  Religion  und  Kultus  der  Romer,  p.  41.  What  has  been  said  above  (p.  191)  concerning 
the  Talmudic  religion  applies  also  to  the  Etruscan  religion  by  which  all  Italy  — i.c.,  no  less  than 
half  of  the  Classical  field  — was  so  deeply  influenced.  It  lies  outside  the  province  of  both  the  con- 
ventional “ Classical”  philologies  and  in  consequence  has  been  practically  ignored,  as  compared 
with  the  Achaean  and  Doric  religions.  In  reality  (as  its  tombs,  temples,  and  myths  prove),  it  forms 
with  them  a single  unit  of  spirit  and  evolution. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELE-  ^ 

court  must  have  been  familiar  with  it.  We  may  attach  any  implications  we 
please  to  “belief”  (whatever  that  may  mean)  in  this  myth;  the  point  is  that 
they  will  be  as  valid  for  Romans  of  the  period  of  the  Kings  as  for  the  inhabitants 
'of  Tegea  or 'Corcyra. 

That  the  pictures  of  Greek  and  Roman  mythology  that  modern  research  has 
developed  are  quite  different  from  this  is  the  result  not  of  the  facts,  but  of  the 
methods.  In  the  case  of  Rome  (Mommsen)  the  festal  calendar  and  the  State 
cults,  in  that  of  Greece  the  poetic  literature,  were  taken  as  the  starting-points. 
Apply  the  “Latin’*  method  which  has  led  up  to  Wissowa’s  picture  to  the  Greek 
cities,  and  the  result  is  a wholly  similar  picture,  as,  for  example,  in  Nilsson’s 
Griechische  Festen. 

When  this  is  taken  into  consideration,  the  Classical  religion  is  seen  to  be  a 
whole  possessing  an  inner  unity.  The  grand  god-legends  of  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury, which  have  the  dew  of  Spring  upon  them,  and  in  their  tragic  holiness 
remind  us  of  Gethsemane,  Balder’s  death,  and  Francis,  are  the  purest  essence  of 
“theoria,”  contemplation,  a world-picture  before  the  inner  eye,  and  born  of  the 
common  inward  awakening  of  a group  of  chosen  souls  from  the  world  of 
chivalry.^  But  the  much  later  city-religions  are  wholly  technique,  iormsil  wor- 
ship, and  as  such  represent  only  one  side  (and  a different  side)  of  piety.  They 
are  as  far  from  the  great  myth  as  they  are  from  the  folk-belief.  They  are  con- 
cerned neither  with  metaphysic  nor  with  ethic,  but  only  with  the  fulfilment  of 
sacral  acts.  And,  finally,  the  choice  of  cults  by  the  several  cities  very  often 
originated,  not,  like  the  myth,  from  a single  world-view,  but  from  the  accidental 
ancestor-  and  family-cults  of  great  houses,  which  (precisely  as  in  the  Gothic) 
made  their  sacred  figures  the  tutelary  deities  of  the  city  and  at  the  same  time 
reserved  to  themselves  the  rights  of  celebrating  and  worshipping  them.  In 
Rome,  for  example,  the  Lupercalia  in  honour  of  the  field-god  Faunus  were  a 
privilege  of  the  Quinctii  and  Fabii. 

The  Chinese  religion,  of  which  the  great  “Gothic”  period  lies  between 
1300  and  1100  and  covers  the  rise  of  the  Chou  dynasty,  must  be  treated  with 
extreme  care.  In  presence  of  the  superficial  profundity  and  pedantic  enthusiasm 
of  Chinese  thinkers  of  the  Confucius  and  Lao-tse  type  — who  were  all  born 
in  the  ancien  regime  period  of  their  state-world  — it  seems  very  ha2:ardous  to 
try  to  determine  anything  at  all  as  to  high  mysticism  and  grand  legends  in  the 
beginning.  Nevertheless,  such  a mysticism  and  such  legends  must  once  have 
existed.  But  it  is  not  from  these  over-rationalized  philosophies  of  the  great 
cities  that  we  shall  learn  anything  about  them  — as  little  as  Homer  can  give 
us  in  the  Classical  parallel,  though  for  another  reason.  What  should  we  know 

^ It  is  immaterial  whether  or  not  Dionysus  was  “borrowed''  from  Thrace,  Apollo  from  Asia 
Minor,  Aphrodite  from  Phoenicia.  It  is  the  fact  that  out  of  the  thousands  of  alien  motives  these 
particular  few  were  chosen  and  combined  in  so  splendid  a unity  that  implies  the  fundamental  newness 
of  the  creation  — just  as  does  the  Mary-cult  of  the  Gothic,  although  in  that  case  the  whole  form- 
material  was  taken  over  from  the  East. 


OF  THE  WEST 

about  Gothic  piety  if  all  its  works  had  undergone  the  censorship  of  Puritans 
and  Retioralists  like  Locke,  Rousseau,  and  Wolff!  And  yet  we  treat  the  Con- 
fucian  close  of  Chinese  inwardness  as  its  beginning  — if,  indeed,  we  do  not 
go  farther  and  describe  the  syncretism  of  Han  times  as  “ the”  religion  of  China  J 

We  know  nowadays  that,  contrary  to  the  usual  assumption,  there  was 
a powerful  old-Chinese  priesthood.^  We  know  that  in  the  text  of  the  Shu- 
King,  relics  of  the  ancient  hero-sagas  and  god-myths  were  worked  over 
rationalistically,  and  were  thus  able  to  survive,  and  similarly  the  Hou-li, 
Ngi-li,  and  Shi-King  ^ would  still  reveal  a good  deal  more  if  only  they  were 
attacked  with  the  conviction  that  there  was  in  them  something  far  deeper 
than  Confucius  and  his  like  were  capable  of  comprehending.  We  bear  of 
chthonian  and  phallic  cults  in  early  Chou  times;  of  orgiastic  rites  in  which 
the  service  of  the  gods  was  accompanied  by  ecstatic  mass-dances;  of  mimic 
representations  and  dialogues  between  god  and  priestess,  out  of  which  probably 
(as  in  Greece)  the  Chinese  drama  evolved.^  And  we  obtain  an  inkling  finally 
of  why  the  luxuriant  growth  of  early  Chinese  god-figures  and  myths  was  neces- 
sarily swallowed  up  in  an  emperor-mythology.  For  not  only  all  saga-emperors, 
but  also  most  of  the  figures  of  the  Hia  and  Shang  dynasties  before  1400  are  — 
all  dates  and  chronicles  notwithstanding  — nothing  but  nature  transformed 
into  history.  The  origins  of  such  a process  lie  deep  in  the  possibilities  of  every 
young  Culture.®  Ancestor-worship  ever  seeks  to  gain  power  over  the  nature- 
datmons.  All  Homeric  heroes,  and  Minos  and  Theseus  and  Romulus,  are  gods 
become  kings.  In  the  Heliand,^  Christ  is  about  to  become  so.  Mary  is  the 
crowned  Queen  of  Heaven.  It  is  the  supreme  (and  perfectly  unconscious) 
mode  which  enables  men  of  breeding  to  venerate  something  - — that  is,  for 
them,  what  is  great  must  have  breeding,  race,  must  be  mighty  and  lordly,  the 
ancestor  of  whole  families.  A strong  priesthood  is  able  to  make^hort  work  of 
this  mythology  of  Time,  but  it  won  through  partially  in  the  Classical  and 
completely  in  China* — exactly  in  proportion  to  the  disappearance  of  the 
priestly  element.  The  old  gods  are  now  emperors,  princes,  ministers,  and 
retainers;  natural  events  have  become  acts  of  rulers,  and  onsets  of  peoples 
social  enterprises.  Nothing  could  have  suited  the  Confucians  better.  Here 
was  a myth  which  could  absorb  social-ethical  tendencies  to  an  indefinite  ex- 

^ As  in  De  Groot’s  Universismus  (1918),  where,  in  fact,  the  systems  of  Taoists,  Confucians,  and 
Buddhists  are  handled  without  a qualm  as  the  religions  of  China.  This  amounts  to  the  same  as 
saying  that  the  Classical  religion  dates  from  Caracalla. 

2 Conrady,  in  Wassiljew,  Die  Erschliessmg  Chinas  (1909),  p.  X32.;  B.  Schindler,  Das  Friestertum 
im  altenChina,l(i^x^. 

3 The  Shu-King  or  Canon  of  History  is  a collection  of  ancient  annals,  the  Shi-King  a canonical 
anthology  of  rhymed  talcs  made  by  Confucius.  Tr. 

« Conrady,  p.  516. 

8 Of  which  an  outstanding  example  is  the  Edda.  — Tf. 

« Sec  article  “ HcHand  ” in  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  edit.,  and  works  there  referred  to.  A handy  edition 
of  the  text  is  included  in  the  “ Keclam  series.  — Tr, 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED^  CROMWELL^^': 

tent,  and  all  that  was  necessary  was  to  expunge  the  traces  of  the  original  nature- 
myth.  . 

To  the  Chinese  waking-consciousness  heaven  and  earth  were  halves  of  the 
macrocosni,  without  opposition,  each  a mirror-image  of  the  other.  In  this 
picture  there  was  neither  Magian  dualism  nor  Faustian  unity  of  active  force. 
Becoming  appears  in  the  unconstrained  reciprocal  working  of  two  principles, 
the and  theyi;?,  which  were  conceived  rather  as  periodic  than  as  polar. 
Accordingly,  there  are  two  souls  in  man,  the  kwei  which  corresponded  with  the 
yin,  the  earthly,  the  dark,  the  cold,  and  disintegrated  with  the  body;  and 
the  sen,  which  is  higher,  light,  and  permanent.^  But,  further,  there  are  in- 
numerable multitudes  of  souls  of  both  kinds  outside  man.  Troops  of  spirits 
fill  the  air  and  the  water  and  the  earth  — all  is  peopled  and  moved  by  kweis  and 
sens.  The  life  of  nature  and  that  of  man  are  in  reality  made  out  of  the  play  of 
such  units.  Wisdom,  will,  force,  and  virtue  depend  on  their  relationship. 
Asceticism  and  orgiasm;  the  knightly  custom  of  hiao,  which  requires  the  noble 
to  revenge  an  impiety  towards  an  ancestor  even  after  centuries,  and  commands 
him  nhver  to  survive  defeat;  ^ and  the  reasoning  moral  of  the  which, 
according  to  the  judgment  of  rationalism,  followed  from  knowledge  — all 
proceed  from  conceptions  of  the  forces  and  possibilities  of  the  kwei  and  the  sen. 

All  this  is  concentrated  in  the  basic  word  The  conflict  between  the 

yang  and  the  yin  in  man  is  the  tao  of  his  life;  the  warp  and  woof  of  the  spirit- 
swarms  outside  him  are  the  tao  of  Nature.  The  world  possesses  tao  inasmuch  as 
it  possesses  beat,  rhythm,  and  periodicity.  It  possesses  li,  tension,  inasmuch  as 
man  knows  it  and  abstracts  from  it  fixed  relationships  for  future  use.  Time, 
Destiny,  Direction,  Race,  History  — all  this,  contemplated  with  the  great 
world-embracing  vision  of  the  early  Chou  times,  lies  in  this  one  word.  The 
path  of  the  Pharaoh  through  the  dark  alley  to  his  shrine  is  related  to  it,  and  so 
is  the  Faustian  passion  of  the  third  dimension,  but  tao  is  nevertheless  far  re- 
moved from  any  idea  of  the  technical  conquest  of  Nature.  The  Chinese  park 
avoids  energetic  perspective.  It  lays  horizon  behind  horizon  and,  instead  of 
pointing  to  a goal,  tempts  to  wander.  The  Chinese  /‘cathedrar*  of  the  early 
time,  the  Pi-Yung,  with  its  paths  that  lead  through  gates  and  thickets,  stairs 
and  bridges  and  courts,  has  never  the  inexorable  march  of  Egypt  or  the  drive 
into  depth  of  the  Gothic. 

When  Alexander  appeared  on  the  Indus,  the  piety  of  these  three  Cultures  — 
Chinese,  Indian,  Classical  — had  long  been  moulded  into  the  historyless  forms 
of  a broad  Taoism,  Buddhism,  and  Stoicism.  But  it  was  not  long  before  the 
group  of  Magian  religions  arose  in  the  region  intermediate  between  the  Classical 
and  the  Indian  field,  and  it  must  have  been  at  about  the  same  time  that  the 

^ This  idea  differs  essentially  from  that  of  the  Egyptian  duality  of  the  spiritual  ht  and  the 
soul-bird  hai,  and  stilt  more  so  from  the  Magian  duality  of  soul-substances. 

* O.  Frankc,  Studitn  fur  d,  Gesch.  der  Kmfu^^iankchm  Dogmas  (192.0),  p.  xoi. 


i88  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

religious  history  of  the  Maya  and  Inca,  now  hopelessly  lost  to  us,  began. 
A thousand  years  later,  when  here  also  all  was  inwardly  fulfilled  and  done  with, 
there  appeared  on  the  unpromising  soil  of  France,  sudden  and  swiftly  mount- 
ing, Germanic-Catholic  Christianity.  It  was  in  this  case  as  in  every  other; 
whether  the  whole  stock  of  names  and  practices  came  from  the  East,  or  whether 
thousands  of  particular  details  were  derived  from  primeval  Germanic  and  Celtic 
feelings,  the  Gothic  religion  is  something  so  new  and  unheard-of,  something 
of  which  the  final  depths  are  so  completely  incomprehensible  by  anyone  outside 
its  faith,  that  to  contrive  linkages  for  them  on  the  historical  surface  is  mean- 
ingless jugglery. 

The  mythic  world  that  thereupon  formed  itself  around  this  young  soul,  an 
integer  of  force,  will,  and  direction  seen  under  the  symbol  of  Infinity,  a stupen- 
dous action-into-distance,  chasms  of  terror  and  of  bliss  suddenly  opening  up  — 
it  was  all,  for  the  elect  of  this  early  religiousness,  something  so  entirely  natural 
that  they  could  not  even  detach  themselves  sufficiently  to  know**  it  as  a unit. 
They  lived  in  it.  To  us,  on  the  contrary,  who  are  separated  from  these  ancestors 
by  thirty  generations,  this  world  seems  so  alien  and  overpowering  that' we  al- 
ways seek  to  grasp  it  in  detail,  and  so  misunderstand  its  wholeness  and  undivid- 
edness. 

The  father-godhead  men  felt  as  Force  itself,  eternal,  grand,  and  ever-present 
activity,  sacred  causality,  which  could  scarcely  assume  any  form  comprehensible 
by  human  eyes.  But  the  whole  longing  of  the  young  breed,  the  whole  desire 
of  this  strongly  coursing  blood,  to  bow  itself  in  humility  before  th.t  meaning  of 
the  blood  found  its  expression  in  the  figure  of  the  Virgin  and  Mother  Mary,  whose 
crowning  in  the  heavens  was  one  of  the  earliest  motives  of  the  Gothic  art. 
She  is  a light-figure,  in  white,  blue,  and  gold,  surrounded  by  the  heavenly  hosts. 
She  leans  over  the  new-born  Child;  she  feels  the  sword  in  her  heart;  she  stands 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross;  she  holds  the  corpse  of  the  dead  Son.  From  the  turn 
of  the  tenth  century  on,  Petrus  Damiani  and  Bernard  of  Glairvaux  developed 
her  cult;  there  arose  the  Ave  Maria  and  the  angelic  greeting  and  later,  among  the 
Dominicans,  the  crown  of  roses.  Countless  legends  gathered  round  her  figure.^ 
She  is  the  guardian  of  the  Church’s  store  of  Grace,  the  Great  Intercessor. 
Among  the  Franciscans  arose  the  festival  of  the  Visitation,  amongst  the  English 
Benedictines  (even  before  iioo)  that  of  the  Immaculate  Conception,  which 
elevated  her  completely  above  mortal  humanity  into  the  world  of  light. 

But  this  world  of  purity,  light,  and  utter  beauty  of  soul  would  have  been 
unimaginable  without  the  counter-idea,  inseparable  from  it,  an  idea  that 
constitutes  one  of  the  maxima  of  Gothic,  one  of  its  unfathomable  creations  — 
one  that  the  present  day  forgets,  and  deliberately  forgets.  While  she  there  sits 
enthroned,  smiling  in  her  beauty  and  tenderness,  there  lies  in  the  background 
another  world  that  throughout  nature  and  throughout  mankind  weaves  and 
^ Reference  may  again  be  made  to  Yrjo  Him,  Tht  Sacred  Shrine.  — Tr. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  ^89 

breeds  ill,  pierces,,  destroys,  seduces  — namely,  the  realm  of  the  Devil. : It 
penetrates  the  whole  of  Creation,  it  lies  ambushed  everywhere.  All  around  is  an 
army  of  goblins,  night-spirits,  witches,  werewolves,  all  in  human  shape. 
No  man  knows  whether  or  not  his  neighbour  has  signed  himself  away  to  the 
Evil  One,  No  one  can  say  of  an  unfolding  child  that  it  is  not  already  a deviFs 
temptress.  An  appalling  fear,  such  as  is  perhaps  only  paralleled  in  the  early 
spring  of  Egypt,  weighs  upon  man.  Every  moment  he  may  stumble  into  the 
abyss.  There  were  black  magic,  and  devils’  masses  and  witches’  sabbaths, 
night  feasts  on  mountain-tops,  magic  draughts  and  charm-formulas.  The 
Prince  of  Hell,  with  his  relatives  — mother  and  grandmother,  for  as  his  very 
existence  denies  and  scorns  the  sacrament  of  marriage,  he  may  not  have  wife.or 
child  — his  fallen  angels  and  his  uncanny  henchmen,  is  one  of  the  most 
tremendous  creations  in  all  religious  history.  The  Germanic  Loki  is  hardly 
more  than  a preliminary  hint  of  him.  Their  grotesque  figures,  with  horns, 
claws,  and  horses’  hoofs,  were  already  fully  formed  in  the  mystery  plays  of 
the  eleventh  century;  everywhere  the  artist’s  fancy  abounded  in  them,  and, 
right  up  to  Diirer  and  Griinewald,  Gothic  painting  is  unthinkable  without 
them.  The  Devil  is  sly,  malignant,  malicious,  but  yet  in  the  end  the  powers 
of  light  dupe  him.  He  and  his  brood,  bad-tempered,  coarse,  fiendishly  inventive, 
are  of  a monstrous  imaginativeness,  incarnations  of  hellish  laughter  opposed 
to  the  illumined  smile  of  the  Queen  of  Heaven,  but  incarnations,  too,  of  Faustian 
world-humour  ^ opposed  to  the  panic  of  the  sinner’s  contrition. 

It  is  not  possible  to  exaggerate  either  the  grandeur  of  this  forceful,  insistent 
picture  or  the  depth  of  sincerity  with  which  it  was  believed  in.  The  Mary- 
myths  and  the  Devil-myth  formed  themselves  side  by  side,  neither  possible 
without  the  other.  Disbelief  in  either  of  them  was  deadly  sin.  There  was  a 
Mary-cult  of  prayer,  and  a Devil-cult  of  spells  and  exorcisms.  Man  walked 
continuously  on  the  thin  crust  of  the  bottomless  pit.  Life  in  this  world  is  a 
ceaseless  and  desperate  contest  with  the  Devil,  into  which  every  individual 
plunges  as  a member  of  the  Church  Militant,  to  do  battle  for  himself  and  to 
win  his  knight’s  spurs.  The  Church  Triumphant  of  angels  and  saints  in  their 
glory  looks  down  from  on  high,  and  heavenly  Grace  is  the  warrior’s  shield  in 
the  battle.  Mary  is  the  protectress  to  whose  bosom  he  can  fly  to  be  comforted, 
and  the  high  lady  who  awards  the  prizes  of  valour.  Both  worlds  have  their 
legends,  their  art,  their  scholasticism,  and  their  mysticism  — for  the  Devil, 
too,  can  work  miracles.  Characteristic  of  this'  alone  among  the  religious 
Springtimes  is  the  symbolism  of  colour  — to  the  Madonna  belong  white  and  blue, 
to  the  Devil  black,  sulphur-yellow,  and  red.  The  saints  and  angels  float  in  the 
aether,  but  the  devils  leap  and  crouch  and  the  witches  rustle  through  the  night. 
It  is  the  two  together,  light  and  night,  which  fill  Gothic  art  with  its  indescrib- 

^ Consider,  for  example,  the  fantastic  paintings  of  Hieronymus  Bosch.  Breughel’s  similar 
humour,  too,  is  unthinkable  without  the  tradition  of  a rank-and-file  of  evil  creatures.  Tr, 


190.  : \ :t:be  decline  of  the  west 

able  inwardness  — that,  and  not  any  “artistic'*  fancifolness.  Every  man 
knew  the  world  to  be  peopled  with  angel  and  devil  troops.  The  light-encircled 
angels  of  Fra  Angelico  and  the  early  Rhenish  masters,  and  the  grimacing  things 
on  the  portals  of  the  great  cathedrals,  really  filled  the  air.  Men  saw  them,  felt 
their  presence  everywhere.  To-day  we  simply  no  longer  know  what  a myth  is; 
for  it  is  no  mere  aesthetically  pleasing  mode  of  representing  something  to  oneself, 
but  a piece  of  the  most  lively  actuality  that  mines  every  corner  of  the  waking- 
consciousness and  shakes  the  innermost  structure  of  being.  These  creatures  were 
about  one  all  the  time.  They  were  glimpsed  without  being  seen.  They  were 
believed  in  with  a faith  that  felt  the  very  thought  of  proof  as  a desecration. 
What  we  call  myth  nowadays,  our  litterateur’s  and  connoisseur’s  taste  for 
Gothic  colour,  is  nothing  but  Alexandrinism.  In  the  old  days  men  did  not 
“enjoy”  it  — behind  it  stood  Death.^ 

For  the  Devil  gained  possession  of  human  souls  and  seduced  them  into 
heresy,  lechery,  and  black  arts.  It  was  war  that  was  waged  against  him  on 
earth, ^ and  waged  with  fire  and  sword  upon  those  who  had  given  themselves 
up  to  him.  It  is  easy  enough  for  us  to-day  to  think  ourselves  out  of  such  notions, 
but  if  we  eliminate  this  appalling  reality  from  Gothic,  all  that  remains  is  mere 
romanticism.  It  was  not  only  the  love-glowing  hymns  to  Mary,  but  the  cries 
of  countless  pyres  as  well  that  rose  up  to  heaven.  Hard  by  the  Cathedral  were 
the  gallows  and  the  wheel.  Every  man  lived  in  those  days  in  the  consciousness 
of  an  immense  danger,  and  it  was  hell,  not  the  hangman,  that  he  feared.  Un- 
numbered thousands  of  witches  genuinely  imagined  themselves  to  be  so;  they 
denounced  themselves,  prayed  for  absolution,  and  in  pure  love  of  truth  confessed 
their  night  rides  and  bargains  with  the  Evil  One.  Inquisitors,  in  teats  and  com- 
passion for  the  fallen  wretches,  doomed  them  to  the  rack  in  order  to  save  their 
souls.  That  is  the  Gothic  myth,  out  of  which  came  the  cathedral,  the  crusader, 
the  deep  and  spiritual  painting,  the  mysticism.  In  its  shadow  flowered  that 
profound  Gothic  blissfulness  of  which  to-day  we  cannot  even  form  an  idea. 

In  Carolingian  times,  all  this  Was  still  strange  and  far.  Charlemagne  in  the 
first  Saxon  Capitulary  (787)  put  a ban  on  the  ancient  Germanic  belief  in  were- 
wolves and  night-gangers  (striga\  and  as  late  as  iixo  it  was  condemned  as  an 
error  in  the  decree  of  Burkard  of  Worms.  But  twenty  years  later  it  was  only  in 
a dilute  form  that  the  anathema  reappeared  in  the  Decretum  Gratiani,  Caesarius 
of  Heisterbach,  already,  was  familiar  with  the  whole  devil-legend  and  in  the 
Legenda  Aurea  it  is  just  as  actual  and  as  effective  as  the  Mary-legends.  In  12.33, 
when  the  Cathedrals  of  Mainz  and  Speyer  were  being  vaulted,  appeared  the  bull 
Vox  in  Kama,  by  which  the  belief  in  Devil  and  witch  was  made  canonical. 

^ So  also  in  the  Classical,  the  Homeric  figures  were  for  educated  people  of  Hellenistic  times 
nothing  but  literature,  representation,  artistic  motive.  Even  for  Plato's  period  they  were  little 
more  than  this.  But  in  1100  b.c.,  Dcmetcr  and  Dionysus  were  a fearful  actuality  before  which  men 
collapsed. 

® The  stern  object  of  Roger  Bacon's  science;  sec  p.  501,  foot-note.  — Tr. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  ^91 

St*  Ffaficis’s  Hyino  to  the  Sug*’  had  not  long  been  written,  and  the  Franciscans 
were  hneeling  in  intimate  prayer  before  Mary  and  spreading  her  cult  afar,  when 
the  Dominicans  armed  themselves  for  battle  with  the  Devil  by  setting  up  the 
Inquisition.  Heavenly  love  found  its  focus  in  the  Mary-image,  and  m ipso 
earthly  love  bccaiBC  akin  to  the  Devil.  Woman  is  Sin  — so  the  great  ascetics 
felt,  as  their  fellows  of  the  Classical,  of  China,  and  of  India  had  felt.  The 
Devil  rules  only  through  woman.  The  witch  is  the  propagator  of  deadly  sin. 
It  was  Thomas  Aquinas  who  evolved  the  repulsive  theory  of  Incubus  and 
Succuba.  Inward  mystics  like  Bonaventura,  Albertus  Magnus,  Duns  Scotus, 
develo|«d  a full  metaphysic  of  the  devilish. 

The  Renaissance  had  ever  the  strong  faith  of  the  Gothic  at  the  back  of  its 
world-outlook.  When  Vasari  eulogized  Cimabue  and  Giotto  for  returning  to 
Nature  as  their  teacher,  it  was  this  Gothic  nature  that  he  had  in  mind,  a nature 
influenced  in  every  nook  by  the  encircling  troops  of  angels  and  devils  that  stood 
there,  ever  threatening,  in  the  light.  “Imitation”  of  Nature  meant  imitation 
of  its  soul,  not  of  its  surface.  Let  us  be  rid  at  last  of  the  fable  of  a renewal  of 
Classical  “Antiquity.*’  Renaissance,  Rinascita,  meant  then  the  Gothic  uplift 
from  A.D.  1000  onward,^  the  new  Raustian  world-feeling,  the  new  personal  ex- 
perience of  the  Ego  in  the  Infinite,  For  some  individual  spirits,  no  doubt,  it 
meant  a sentimental  enthusiasm  for  the  Classical  (or  what  was  thought  to  be 
the  Classical),  but  that  was  a manifestation  of  taste,  nothing  more.^  The 
Classical  myth  was  entertainment-material,  an  allegorical  play,  through  the 
thin  veil  of  which  men  saw,  no  less  definitely  than  before,  the  old  Gothic 
actuality.  When  Savonarola  stood  up,  the  antique  trappings  vanished  from  the 
surface  of  Florentine  life  in  an  instant.  It  was  all  for  the  church  that  the  Floren- 
tines laboured,  and  with  conviction.  Raphael  was  the  most  deeply  intimate 
of  all  Madonna-painters.  A firm  belief  in  the  realm  of  Satan,  and  in  deliverance 
from  it  through  the  saints,  lay  at  the  root  of  all  this  art  and  literature;  and 
every  one  of  them,  painters,  architects,  and  humanists  — however  often  the 
names  of  Cicero  and  Virgil,  Venus  and  Apollo  were  on  their  lips  — looked 
upon  the  burning  of  witches  as  something  entirely  natural  and  wore  amulets 
against  the  devil.  The  writings  of  Marsilius  Ficinus  are  full  of  learned  dis- 
quisitions on  devils  and  witches,  Francesco  della  Mirandola  wrote  (in  elegant 
Latin)  his  dialogue  “ The  Witch  ’ ’ in  order  to  warn  the  fine  intellects  of  his  circle 
against  a danger.^  When  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  at  the  summit  of  the  Renaissance, 

^ This  is  the  real  conclusion  that  emerges  from  Burdach’s  Keformation,  Renaissance,  Kumanismus 
(1918). 

^ In  this  connexion,  it  is  important  to  observe  that  the  education-movement  of  Humanism  took 
into  its  field  modem  Italian,  Hebrew,  etc.,  as  well  as  the  Classical  knowledge.  A Dante  professor- 
ship was  founded  in  Florence  in  1373.  As  for  the  Classical  itself,  side  by  side  with  all  the  enthusiasm 
we  find  a significant  note  in  Boccaccio,  who  thanks  Jesus  Christ  for  a victory  over  unbelief  that  has 
delivered  up  the  enemy  s camp  to  the  victor’s  enjoyment.  Burkhardt,  Renaissance,  Vol.  I,  p.  2.62. 
(Rcclam  edition).  — Tr. 

^ Bezold,  Hist,  Zeitschr.,  45,  p.  ao8. 


z^r'  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

was  working  upon  his  **Anna  Selbdritt/’^  the  Witches’  Hammer’*  was 
being  written  in  Rome  (1487)  in  the  finest  Humanistic  Latin.  It  was  these  that 
constitute  the  real  myth  of  the  Renaissance,  and  without  them  we  shall  never 
understand  the  glorious  and  truly  Gothic  force  of  this  anti-Gothic  movement.^ 
Men  who  did  not  feel  the  Devil  very  near  at  hand  could  not  have  created  the 
Dmna  Commedia  or  the  frescoes  of  Orvieto®  or  the  ceiling  of  the  Sistine 
Chapel. 

It  was  the  tremendous  background  of  this  myth  that  awakened  in  the 
Faustian  soul  a feeling  of  what  it  was.  An  Ego  lost  in  Infinity,  an  Ego  that  was 
all  force,  but  a force  negligibly  weak  in  an  infinity  of  greater  forces;  ^ that  was 
all  will,  but  a will  full  of  fear  for  its  freedom.  Never  has  the  problem  of  Free- 
will been  meditated  upon  more  deeply  or  more  painfully.  Other  Cultures  have 
simply  not  known  it.  But  precisely  because  here  Magian  resignation  was  totally 
impossible  — because  that  which  thought  was  not  an  “it”  or  particle  of  an  all- 
soul, but  an  individual,  fighting  Ego,  seeking  to  maintain  itself  — every  limi- 
tation upon  freedom  was  felt  as  a chain  that  had  to  be  dragged  along  through 
life,  and  life  in  turn  was  felt  as  a living  death.  And  if  so  — why?  For  ti^hat? 

The  result  of  this  in-looking  was  that  immense  sense  of  guilt  which  runs 
throughout  these  centuries  like  one  long,  desperate  lament.  The  cathedrals  rose 
evermore  supplicatingly  to  heaven,  the  Gothic  vaulting  became  a joining  of 
hands  in  prayer,  and  little  comfort  of  light  shone  through  the  high  windows 
into  the  night  of  the  long  naves.  The  choking  parallel-sequences  of  the  church 
chants,  the  Latin  hymns,  tell  of  bruised  knees  and  flagellations  in  the  nocturnal 
cell.  For  Magian  man  the  world-cavern  had  been  close  and  the  heaven  impend- 
ing, but  for  Gothic  man  heaven  was  infinitely  far.  No  hand  seemed  to  reach 
down  from  these  spaces,  and  all  about  the  lone  Ego  the  mocking  Devil’s  world 
lay  in  leaguer.  And,  therefore,  the  great  longing  of  Mysticism  was  to  lose 
created  form  (as  Heinrich  Sense  said),  to  be  rid  of  self  and  all  things  (Meister 
Eckart),  to  abandon  selfness  (Thedogie  deutsdi)!*  And  out  of  these  longings  there 
grew  up  an  unending  dogged  subtilizing  on  notions  which  were  ever  more 
and  more  finely  dissected  to  get  at  the  “why,”  and  finally  a universal  cry  for 
Grace  — not  the  Magian  Grace  coming  down  as  substance,  but  the  Faustian 
Grace  that  unbinds  the  Will. 

To  he  able  to  will  freely  is,  at  the  very  bottom,  the  one  gift  that  the  Faustian 
soul  asks  of  heaven.  The  seven  sacraments  of  the  Gothic,  felt  as  one  by  Peter 
Lombard,  elevated  into  dogma  by  the  Lateran  Council  of  1Z15,  and  grounded 

^ Italian,  “Anna  Metterza.”  The  reference  is  to  the  St.  Anne  of  the  Louvre  and  the  Royal 
Academy  Diploma  Gallery,  London.  — Tr. 

2 Cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  — Tf. 

® Fra  Angelico  and  Luca  Signorelli.  — Tr. 

The  sense  of  such  a relativity  led  to  a mathematic  (the  calculus)  which  is  literally  based  on 
the  ignoring  of  second-  and  third-order  magnitudes.  — Tr. 

^ See  article  “Mysticism”  in  Ency,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  ; 193 

in  mystical  foundations  by  Thomas  Aquinas,  mean  this  and  only  this.  They 
accompany  the  unit  soul  ffom  birth  to  death  and  protect  it  against  the  diabolical 
powers  that  seek  to  nest  themseiyes  in  its  will.  For  to  sell  oneself  to  the  Devil 
means  to  deliver  up  oni s will  to  him.  The  Church  Militant  on  earth  is  the 
visible  community  of  those  who  are  enabled,  by  enjoyment  of  the  sacraments, 
to  will.  This  certainty  of  free  being  is  held  to  be  guaranteed  in  the  altar-sacra- 
ment, which  accordingly  suffers  a complete  change  of  meaning.  The  miracle  of 
the  holy  tranformation  which  takes  place  daily  under  the  hands  of  the  priest  ■ — 
the  consecrated  Host  in  the  high  altar  of  the  cathedral,  wherein  the  be- 
liever sensed  the  presence  of  him  who  of  old  sacrificed  himself  to  secure  for 
his  own  the  freedom  to  will  — called  forth  a sigh  of  relief  of  such  depth  and 
sincerity  as  we  moderns  can  hardly  imagine.  It  was  in  thanksgiving,  there- 
fore, that  the  chief  feast  of  the  Catholic  Church,  Corpus  Christi,  was  founded  in 
1x64.^ 

But  more  important  still  — and  by  far  — was  the  essentially  Faustian  prime- 
sacrament  of  Contrition,  This  ranks  with  the  Mary-myth  and  the  Devil-myth 
as  the  third  great  creation  of  the  Gothic.  And,  indeed,  it  is  from  this  third 
that  the  other  two  derive  depth  and  meaning;  it  discloses  the  last  secrets  of 
this  Culture’s  soul,  and  so  sets  it  apart  from  all  other  Cultures.  The  effect  of  the 
Magian  baptism  was  to  incorporate  a man  in  the  great  consensus  — • the  one  great 
**  it”  of  the  divine  spirit  took  up  its  abode  in  him  as  in  the  others,  and  thereafter 
resignation  to  all  that  should  happen  became  his  duty.  But  in  the  Faustian 
contrition  the  idea  of  personality  was  implicit.  It  is  not  true  that  the  Renaissance 
discovered  personality  what  it  did  was  to  bring  personality  up  to  a brilliant 
surface,  whereby  it  suddenly  became  visible  to  everyone.  Its  birth  is  in  Gothic; 
it  is  the  most  intimate  and  peculiar  property  of  Gothic;  it  is  one  and  the  same 
with  Gothic  soul.  For  this  contrition  is  something  that  each  one  accomplishes 
for  himself  alone.  He  alone  can  search  his  own  conscience-  He  alone  stands 
rueful  in  the  presence  of  the  Infinite.  He  alone  can  and  must  in  confession  un- 
derstand and  put  into  words  his  own  past.  And  even  the  absolution  that  frees 
his  Ego  for  new  responsible  action  is  personal  to  himself.  Baptism  is  wholly 
impersonal  — one  receives  it  because  one  is  a man,  not  because  one  is  this  man 
— but  the  idea  of  contrition  presupposes  that  the  value  of  every  act  depends 
uniquely  upon  the  man  who  does  it.  This  is  what  differentiates  the  Western 
drama  from  the  Classical,  the  Chinese,  and  the  Indian.  This  is  what  directs 
our  legislation  more  and  more  with  reference  to  the  doer  rather  than  to  the  deed, 

^ After  its  confirmation  in  1311,  the  character  of  this  festival  as  one  of  popular  joy  became  still 
more  marked  by  its  association  with  the  nascent  drama  (sec  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  articles  Corpus 
Christi,”  “Drama”;  and  Y.  Him,  op.  cit.,  pp.  i44'"5‘  — 

^ Ot  even  rediscovered  it.  For  Classical  man  as  a spirit-filled  body  is  one  amongst  many  quite 
independent  units,  while  Faustian  man  is  a centre  in  the  universe,  which  with  its  soul  embraces  the 
whole.  But  personality  (individuality)  means,  n6t  something  separate  (jmt,dnes\  but  something 
single  (eintlges). 


OF  THE  WEST 

and  bases  our  priinarj  ethical  conceptions  on  individual  doing  and  not  typical 
behaviour.  Faustian  responsiblity  instead  of  Magian  resignedness,  the  in- 
dividual instead  of  the  consensm;  relief  from,  instead  of  submissiveness  under, 
burdens  — that  is  the  difference  between  the  most  active  and  the  most  passive 
of  all  sacraments,  and  at  the  back  of  it  again  lies  the  difference  between  the 
world-cavern  and  infinity-dynamics.  Baptism  is  something  done  upon  one. 
Contrition  something  done  by  oneself  within  oneself.  And,  moreover,  this 
conscientious  searching  of  one’s  own  past  is  both  the  earliest  evidence  of,  and 
the  finest  training  for,  the  historical  sense  of  Faustian  mankind.  There  is  no  other 
Culture  in  which  the  personal  life  of  the  living  man,  the  conscientious  tracing 
of  each  feature,  has  been  so  important,  for  this  alone  has  required  the  accounts 
to  be  rendered  in  words.  If  historical  research  and  biography  are  characteristic 
of  the  spirit  of  the  West  from  its  beginnings;  if  both  in  the  last  resort  are 
self-examination  and  confession;  if  our  lives  arc  led  with  an  assuredness  and 
conscious  reference  to  the  historic  background  that  nowhere  else  has  been 
even  imagined  as  possible  or  tolerable;  if,  lastly,  we  habitually  look  at 
history  in  terms  of  millennia,  not  rhapsodically  or  decoratively  as  in  the 
Classical  World  and  in  China,  but  directionally  and  with  the  almost  sacra- 
tnental  formula  ''Tout  comprendre,  cest  tout  pardonner^  ever  in  our  minds  — • we 
have  this  sacrament  of  the  Gothic  Church,  this  continual  unburdening  of 
the  Ego  by  historical  test  and  justification  to  thank  for  it.  Every  confession 
is  an  autobiography.  This  peculiar  liberation  of  the  will  is  to  us  so  neces- 
sary that  the  refusal  of  absolution  drives  to  despair,  even  to  destruction. 
Only  he  who  senses  the  bliss  of  such  an  inward  acquittal  can  comprehend  the 
old  name  of  the  sacrammtum  resurgentiunzy  the  sacrament  of  those  who  are  risen 
again. ^ 

When  in  this  heaviest  of  decisions  the  soul  is  left  to  its  own  resources, 
something  unresolved  remains  hanging  over  it  like  a perpetual  cloud.  It  may 
be  said,  therefore,  that  perhaps  no  institution  in  any  religion  has  brought  so 
much  happiness  into  the  world  as  this.  The  whole  inwardness  and  heavenly 
love  of  the  Gothic  rests  upon  the  certainty  of  full  absolution  through  the  power 
invested  in  the  priest.  In  the  insecurity  that  ensued  from  the  decline  of  this 
sacrament,  both  Gothic  joy  of  life  and  the  Mary-world  of  the  light  faded  out. 
Only  the  Devil’s  world,  with  its  grim  all-presentness,  remained.  And  then, 
in  place  of  the  blissfulness  irrecoverably  lost,  came  the  Protestant,  and  especially 

^ Hcqcc  it  is  that  this  sacrament  has  conferred  a position  of  such  immense  power  upon  the  West- 
ern priest.  He  receives  the  personal  confession*  and  speaks  personally,  in  the  name  of  the  Infinite, 
the  absolution,  without  which  life  would  be  unbearable. 

The  notion  of  confession  as  a duty^  which  was  finally  established  in  1115,  first  arose  in  England, 
whence  came  also  the  first  confession-books  (Pcnitentials).  In  England,  too,  originated,  the  idea 
of  the  Immaculate  Conception,  and  even  the  idea  of  the  Papacy  — at  a time  when  Rome  itself  thought 
of  it  as  a question  of  power  and  precedence.  It  is  evidence  of  the  independence  of  Faustian  Chris- 
tianity from  Magian  that  its  decisive  ideas  grew  up  in  those  remote  parts  of  its  field  which  lay 
beyond  the  Frankish  Empire. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED;'  CROMWELX:  Z95 

Puritan,  heroism,  which  conM  fight  on,  even  hopeless,  in  a lost  position. 

'*  Auricular  confession/*  said  Goethe  once,  “ought  never  to  have  been  taken 
from  mankind/*  Over  the  lands  in  which  it  had  died  out,  a heavy  earnestness 
spread  itself.  Ethic  and  costume,  art  and  thought,  took  on  the  night-colour 
of  the  only  myth  that  remained  outstanding.  Nothing  is  less  sunlit  than  the 
doctrines  of  Kant,  “Every  man  his  own  priest’*  is  a conviction  to  which  men 
could  win  through,  but  only  as  to  that  part  of  priesthood  that  involves  duties, 
not  as  to  that,  which  possesses  powers.  No  man  confesses  himself  with  the  inward 
certainty  of  absolution.  And  as  the  need  of  the  soul  to  be  relieved  of  its  past 
and  to  be  redirected  remained  urgent  as  ever,  all  the  higher  forms  of  com- 
munication were  transmuted,  and  in  Protestant  countries  music  and  painting, 
letter- writing  and  memoirs,  from  being  modes  of  description  became  modes  of 
self-denunciation,  penance,  and  unbounded  confession.  Even  in  Catholic  regions 
too  — in  Paris’  above  all  — art  as  psychology  set  in  as  doubt  in  the  sacrament 
of  Contrition  and  Absolution  grew.  Outlook  on  the  world  was  lost  in  ceaseless 
mine-warfare  within  the  self.  In  lieu  of  the  Infinite,  contemporaries  and  de- 
scendants were  called  in  to  be  priests  and  judges.  Personal  art,  in  the  sense  that 
distinguishes  Goethe  from  Dante,  and  Rembrandt  from  Michelangelo,  was  a 
substitute  for  the  sacrament  of  confession.  It  was,  also,  the  sign  that  this 
Culture  was  already  in  the  condition  of  a Late  period.  V 

IV 

In  all  Cultures,  Reformation  has  the  same  meaning  — the  bringing  back  of 
the  religion  to  the  purity  of  its  original  idea  as  this  manifested  itself  in  the  great 

^ The  immeasurable  difference  between  the  Faustian  and  the  Russian  souls  is  disclosed  in  certain 
word-sounds.  The  Russian  word  for  heaven  is  ^'nyebo**  which  contains  in  its  n a negative  element. 
Western  man  looks  up,  the  Russian  looks  horizontally  into  the  broad  plain.  The  death-impulse, 
too,  of  the  respective  souls  is  distinguishable,  in  that  for  the  West  it  is  the  passion  of  drive  all-ways 
into  infinite  space,  whereas  for  Russians  it  is  an  expressing  and  expanding  of  self  (Sichentdussernyy 
till  *'it'’  in  the  man  becomes  identical  with  the  boundless  plain  itself.  It  is  thus  that  a Russian 
understands  the  words  “man”  and  “brother.”  He  secs  even  mankind  as  a plane.  The  idea  of  a 
Russian’s  being  an  astronomer  f He  docs  not  sec  the  stars  at  all,  he  sees  only  the  horizon.  Instead 
of  the  vault  he  secs  the  down-hang  of  the  heavens  — something  that  somewhere  combines  with 
the  plain  to  form  the  horizon.  For  him  the  Copernican  system,  be  it  never  so  mathematical,  is 
spiritually  contemptible. 

While  our  German  Schicksal”  rings  like  a trumpet  call,  is  a genuflection.  There  is 

no  room  for  the  upstanding  “I”  beneath  this  almost  flat-roofed  heaven.  That  All  an  responsible  for 
air*  — the  “it”  for  the  “it”  in  this  boundlessly  extended  plain  — is  the  metaphysical  fundament 
of  ail  Dostoyevski’s  creation.  That  is  why  Ivan  Karamasov  must  name  himself  murderer  although 
another  had  done  the  murder.  The  criminal  is  the  “unfortunate,”  the  “wretch”  — it  is  the  utter 
negation  of  Faustian  personal  responsibility.  Russian  mysticism  has  nothing  of  that  upstriving 
inwardness  of  Gothic,  of  Rembrandt,  of  Beethoven,  which  can  swell  up  to  a heaven-storming  jubi- 
lation — its  god  is  not  the  azure  depth  up  above.  Mystical  Russian  love  is  love  of  the  plain,  the 
love  of  brothers  under  equal  pressure  all  along  the  earth,  ever  along  and  along;  the  love  of  the 
poor  tortured  beasts  that  wander  on  it,  the  love  of.  plants  — never  of  birds  and  clouds  and  stars. 
The  Russian  *‘volyaf’  our  “will,”  means  principally  non-compulsion,  freedom  not  for  something 
but  from  something,  and  particularly  freedom  from  comptilsion  to  personal  doing.  Free-will  is 


2.96  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

centuries  of  the  beginning.  In  no  Culture  is  this  movement  missing,  whether 
we  know  about  it,  as  in  the  case  of  Egypt,  or  not,  as  in  that  of  China.  It  means, 
further,  that  the  city  and  with  it  the  city-spirit  are  gradually  freeing  them- 
selves from  the  sdul  of  the  country-side,  setting  up  in  opposition  to  the  latter's 
all-power  and  reconsidering  the  feelings  and  thoughts  of  the  primitive  pre-urban 
time  with  reference  to  its  present  self.  It  was  Destiny  and  not  intellectual 
necessities  of  thought  that  led,  in  the  Magian  and  Faustian  worlds,  to  the 
budding-off  of  new  religions  at  this  point.  We  know  to-day  that,  under 
Charles  V,  Luther  was  within  an  ace  of  becoming  the  reformer  of  the  whole 
undivided  Church. 

For  Luther,  like  all  reformers  in  all  Cultures,  was  not  the  first,  but  the  last 
of  a grand  succession  which  led  from  the  great  ascetics  of  the  open  land  to  the 
city-priest.  Reformation  is  Gothic^  the  accomplishment  and  the  testament 
thereof.  Luther’s  chorale  '"Ein  feste  Burg''  does  not  belong  to  the  spiritual 
lyrism  of  the  Baroque.  There  rumbles  in  it  still  the  splendid  Latin  of  the  Dies 
ira.  It  is  the  Church  Militant’s  last  mighty  Sa tan-song.^  Luther,  like  every 
reformer  that  had  arisen  since  the  year  1000,  fought  the  Church  not  because  it 
demanded  too  much,  but  because  it  demanded  too  little.  The  great  stream 
flows  on  from  Cluny:  through  Arnold  of  Brescia,  who  preached  return  to 
Apostolic  simplicity  and  was  burned  in  1155;  through  Joachim  of  Floris,  who 
was  the  first  to  use  the  word  reformate;"  the  spirituals  of  the  Franciscan 
Order;  Jacopone  da  Todi,  revolutionary  and  singer  of  the  Stahat  Mater ^ the 
knight  whom  the  death  of  a young  wife  turned  into  an  ascetic  and  who  tried 
to  overthrow  Boniface  VIII  for  governing  the  Church  too  slackly;  through 
Wyclif  and  Hus  and  Savonarola;  to  Luther,  Karlstadt,  Zwingli,  Calvin,  and 
— Loyola.  The  intention  of  these  men,  one  and  all,  was  not  to  overcome  the 
Christianity  of  the  Gothic,  but  to  bring  it  to  inward  fulfilment.  So  also  with 
Marcion,  Athanasius,  the  Monophysites,  and  the  Nestorians,  who  sought  in 
the  Councils  of  Ephesus  and  Chalcedon  to  purify  the  faith  and  lead  it  back  to 
its  origins.^  But  so  also  the  Orphics  of  the  Classical  seventh  century  were  the 
last  and  not  the  first  of  a series  that  must  have  begun  even  before  1000  b.c.  So 
with  the  establishment  of  the  Re  religion  in  Egypt  at  the  close  of  the  Old 
Kingdom,  the  Egyptian  Gothic.  It  is  an  ending,  not  a new  beginning,  that  these 

seen  as  a condition  in  which  no  one  else  can  command  it,”  and  in  which,  therefore,  one  may  give 
way  to  one’s  own  disposition,  ‘‘(jm/',*’  esprit"  “spirit,”  go  thus:  the  Russian  " duch"  goes 

thus:  V->.  What  sort  of  a Christianity  will  come  forth  one  day  from  this  world-feeling? 

^ "Und  wenn  die  Welt  veil  Teufel  war" 

Und  wollten  ms  verschlingen 
So  furchten  wit  uns  nimmermehr 
Bs  soil  ms  doch  gelingen" 

* And,  as  the  secession  of  a reformed  Church  necessarily  transforms  the  parent  Church,  there 
Was  a Magim  counter-reformation  also.  In  the  Decretum  Gelasii  (r.  500,  Rome)  even  Clement  of  Alex- 
andria, Tertullian,  and  Lactantius,  and  in  the  Synod  of  Byzantium  C543)  Origen,  were  declared 
heretical. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL 

sigttify*'  Just  so,  aigaitt,  a rcfom-fulfilment  happened  in, the  Vedic  religion: 
about  the  tenth  century  and  was  followed  by  the  setting-in  of  late  Brahmanisro.. 
And  in  the  ninth  century  a corresponding  epochal  point  must  have  occurred  in 
the  religious  history  of  China.  . 

However  widely  the  Reformations  of  the  various  Cultures  may  differ  amongst 
themselves,  the  purpose  is  the  same  for  all  — to  bring  the  faith,  which  had 
strayed  all  too  far  into  the  world-as-history  and  time-secularism 
back  into  the  realm  of  Nature,  clean  waking-consciousness,  and  pure  cause- 
controlled  and  cause-pervaded  Space;  out  of  the  world  of  economics  (“wealth'’) 
into  that  of  science  (“poverty”),  out  of  patrician  and  cavalier  society  (which 
was  also  that  of  Renaissance  and  Humanism)  into  that  of  spirituals  and  ascetics; 
and  lastly  (as  significant  as  it  is  impossible)  out  of  the  political  ambitions  of 
vestmented  human  thoroughbreds  into  the  realm  of  holy  Causality  that  is 
not  of  this  world. 

In  those  times  the  West — and  the  situation  was  the  same  in  the  other 
Cultures  — divided  the  Corpus  Christiamrum  of  the  population  into  the  three 
classes  of  status  p&lictims,  ecdesiastims^  and  monarnkus  (that  is,  urban),  but  as  the 
outlook  was  that  of  the  city  and  no  longer  that  of  the  castle  and  the  village, 
officials  and  judges  belonged  to  the  first-named  class,  men  of  learning  to  the 
second  — and  the  peasant  was  forgotten.  This  is  the  key  to  the  opposition  of 
the  Renaissance  and  Reformation,  which  was  an  opposition  of  class  and  not  a 
difference  in  world-feeling  like  that  of  Renaissance  and  Gothic.  Castle-taste  and 
cloister-soul  moved  into  town,  and  remained  there,  as  before,  in  opposition  — 
as  in  Florence  the  Medici  to  Savonarola,  and  as  in  old  Greece  the  noble  families 
of  the  cities — with  their  Homer  now  finally  written  down  — to  the  last 
Orphics  — these,  too,  writers.  The  Renaissance  artists  and  Humanists  are  the 
legitimate  successors  of  the  Troubadours  and  Minnesingers,  and  just  as  there  is  a 
line  from  Arnold  of  Brescia  to  Luther,  so  there  is  a line  from  Bertrand  de  Born 
and  Peire  Cardinal,  through  Petrarch,  to  Ariosto.  The  castle  has  become  the 
town-house,  the  knight  the  patrician.  The  whole  movement  adhered  to  palaces, 
as  courts;  it  limits  itself  to  those  fields  of  expression  that  affect  and  interest 
polite  society;  it  is  bright  and  gay,  like  Homer,  because  it  is  courtly  — an  at- 
mosphere where  problems  were  bad  taste,  where  Dante  and  Michelangelo  cannot 
but  have  felt  themselves  out  of  place  — and  it  spread  over  the  Alps  to  the  courts 
of  the  North,  not  as  a new  world-outlook,  but  as  a new  taste.  The  “ Northern” 
Renaissance  of  the  mercantile  and  capital  cities  consisted  simply  in  the  fact  that 
the  hon  ton  of  the  Italian  patriciate  replaced  that  of  the  French  chivalry. 

But  the  last  reformers,  too,  the  Luthers  and  Savonarolas,  were  urban  monks, 
and  this  differentiates  them  profoundly  from  the  Joachims  and  the  Bernards. 
Their  intellectual  and  urban  askesis  is  the  stepping-stone  from  the  hermitages 
of  quiet  valleys  to  the  scholar’s  study  of  the  Baroque.  The  mystic  experience 
of  Luther  which  gave  birth  to  his  doctrine  of  justification  is  the  experience. 


j,^g  THE  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

not  of  a St.  Bernard  in  the  presence  of  Woods  and  hills  and  clouds  and  stars,  but 

of  a man  who  looks  through  narrow  windows  on  the  streets  and  ouse  wa  s 

and  gables  Broad  God-perfused  nature  is  remote,  outside  the  city  wall,  and 

dmch/d  W the  sou  is  iosido  i,.  Wi.hio  »b.n, « 

walled  waking-consciousness  sense  and  reason  part  coinpa  y v . 

Ilem^s,  and  the  city-mysticism  of  the  last  reformers  is 

pure  reason  through  and  through,  and  not  one  f T le  “5  Lth 

Lncepts,  in  presence  of  which  the  brightly  coloured  figures  of  the  old  my 

‘“‘^NSSs^rSotoforo.  it  wss,  io  it,  tej  depths,  s thing  of  the  few  Nothing 
was  left  of  that  sensible  content  that  formerly  had  offered  even  to  ttepoores 
something  to  grip.  The  mighty  act  of  Luther  was  a purely  intellectual  decision. 
Not  for  n^othiig^has  he  been  regarded  as  the  last  great  Schooima^of  the  line 
of  Occam.  1 He  completely  liberated  the  Faustian  personality  t e in  c - 
mediate  person  of  the  priest,  which  had  formerly  stood  between  it  and  the 
Infinite  was  removed.  And  now  it  was  wholly  alone,  self-oriented  its  own 
priest  Ind  its  own  judge.  But  the  common  people  could  only  feel,  not 
Serstand,  the  element  of  liberation  in  it  ail.  They  welcomed,  enthusiastically 
indeed  the  tearing-up  of  visible  duties,  but  they  did  not  come  to  realize  that 

these  had  been  replaced  by  intellectual  duties  that  were  still  stricter.  Fr^cis  of 

Assisi  had  given  much  and  taken  little,  but  the  urban  Reformation  took  much 
and,  as  far  as  the  majority  of  people  were  concerned,  ^ ^ 

The  holy  Causality  of  the  Contrition-sacrament  Luther  replaced  by  the 
mystic  expeLnee  of  inward  absolution  “by  faith  alone.  He  came  very  near 
rtenXf  Cl™,  m concept  rf  conmtion  as  Wdong.  as  a . 

0«s  mtelltctual  askesis  i»  contrast  to  the  askcsis  of  outward  and  visible  worfa^ 
Both  of  them  understood  absolution  as  a divine  miracle:  in  so  far  as  the  man 
^ang.  himself,  it  is  God  changing  him.  But  what  no 
mysticism  can  replace  is  the  “Tu”  outside,  in  free  nature.  The  one  and  the 

other  preached:  “Thou  must  believe  that  God  has  forgiven  thee,  but  fo 

Bernard  belief  was  through  the  powers  of  the  priest  elevated  to  knowledge, 
whereas  for  Luther  it  sank  to  doubt  and  desperate  insistence.  This  litt  e , ^ 
detached  from  the  cosmos,  nailed  up  in  an  individual  being  and  (in  ®ost 
terrific  sense  of  the  word)  alone,  needed  the  proximity  of  a 
and  the  weaker  the  intellect,  the  more  urgent  the  need.  Herein  lies  ultimate 
meaning  of  the  Western  priest,  who  from  1x15  was  elevated  above  t^yes 
mankind  by  the  sacrament  of  ordination  and  its  charoaer  he  was  a 

hand  with  which  even  the  poorest  wretch  could  grasp  God.  This  link 

with  the  Infinite,  Protestantism  destroyed.  Strong  souls  could  and  did  win  1 
back  for  themselves,  but  for  the  weaker  it  was  gradual  y ^ 

though  for  him  the  inward  miracle  was  successful  of  itself,  would  not  deprive 
1 Boehmer,  Luthtr  hn  Uchte  der  mmm  Forschang  (1918),  pp.  54,  =* 


■ PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL,  „ ' 295 

others  of  the  geotler  waj,  for  the  very  illamination  of  his  soul  showed  him  the 
Mary-world  ■ of  liTiug  nature,  ail-pervading,  ever  near,  and  ever  helpful.  : 
Luther,  who  knew  himself  only  and  not  men,  set  postulated  heroism  in  place 
of  actual  weakness.  For  him  life  was  desperate  battle  against  the  Devil,  and 
that  battle  he  called  upon  everyone  to  fight.  And  everyone  who  fought  it 
fought  alone. 

The  Reformation  abolished  the  whole  bright  and  consoling  side  of  the 
Gothic  myth  — the  cult  of  Mary,  the  veneration  of  the  saints,  the  relics,  the 
pilgrimages,  the  mass.  But  the  myth  of  devildom  and  witchcraft rremained, 
for  it  was  the  embodiment  and  cause  of  the  inner  torture,  and  now  that  torture 
at  last  rose  to  its  supreme  horror.^  Baptism  was,  for  Luther  at  least,  an  exor- 
cism, the  veritable  sacrament  of  devil-banning.  There  grew  up  a large,  purely 
Protestant  literature  about  the  DeviL^  Out  of  the  Gothic  wealth  of  colour, 
there  remained  black;  of  its  arts,  music,  in  particular  organ-music.  But 
in  the  place  of  the  mythic  light-world,  whose  helpful  nearness  the  faith  of 
the  common  people  could  not,  after  all,  forgo,  there  rose  again  out  of  long- 
buried  depths  an  clement  of  ancient  German  myth.  It  came  so  stealthily  that 
even  to-day  its  true  significance  is  not  yet  realized.  The  expressions  T folk- 
tale’* and  popular  custom”  are  inadequate:  it  is  a true  Myth  that  inheres  in 
the  firm  belief  in  dwarfs,  bogies,  nixies,  house-sprites,  and  sweeping  clouds  of 
the  disembodied,  and  a true  Cult  that  is  seen  in  the  rites,  offerings,  and  conjur- 
ings  that  are  still  practised  with  a pious  awe.  In  Germany,  at  any  rate,  the 
Saga  took  the  place,  unperceived,  of  the  Mary-myth:  Mary  was  now  called 
Frau  Holde,  and  where  once  the  saints  had  stood,  appeared  the  faithful  Eckart. 
In  the  English  people  what  arose  was  something  that  has  long  been  designated 
“ Bibie-fetishism. 

What  Luther  lacked  — and  it  is  an  eternal  fatality  for  Germany  — was  the 
eye  for  facts  and  the  power  of  practical  organization.  He  did  not  bring  his 
doctrines  to  a clear  system,  nor  did  he  lead  the  great  movement  and  choose  its 
aim.  The  one  and  the  other  were  the  work  of  his  great  successor  Calvin. 
While  the  Lutheran  movement  advanced  leadcrless  in  central  Europe,  he  viewed 
his  rule  in  Geneva  as  the  starting-point  of  a systematic  subjection  of  the  world 
under  a Protestantism  unfalteringly  thought  out  to  its  logical  conclusion. 
Therefore  he,  and  he  alone,  became  a world-power;  therefore  it  was  the 
decisive  struggle  between  the  spirit  of  Calvin  and  the  spirit  of  Loyola  that 
dominated,  from  the  Spanish  Armada  on,  the  world-politics  of  the  Baroque 

^ See,  for  iastance,  H.  T.  Buckle,  Hist  Civilisiation  in  England,  VoL  III,  ch.  iv,  for  the  Scottish 
outlook,  which  at  times  attributed  ail  this  horror,  not  even  to  an  anti-God,  but  to  God  himself. 
“Consider,  who  is  the  contriver  of  these  torments.  There  have  been  some  very  exquisite  torments 
contrived  by  the  wit  of  men  ...  but  all  these  fall  as  far  short  qf  the  torments  ye  are  to  endure  as  the 
wisdom  of  man  falls  short  of  that  of  God.  . . . Infinite  wisdom  has  contrived  that  evil  “ (Jh  Great 
Concern  of  Salvation,  by  T.  Halyburton,  172.x).  — Tr. 

2 M.  Osborn.  Hie  Teufelsliteratur  des  iS,  Jahrh,  (1893). 


300,:  : / ' 'T  DECLINE  OF'THE  WEST  : : 

and  the  struggle  for  sea-supremacy.  While  in  mid-Europe  Reformation  and 
Counter-Reformation  struggled  for  some  small  imperial  city  or  a few  poor 
Swiss  cantons,  Canada,  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges,  the  Cape,  the  Mississippi, 
were  the  scenes  of  great  decisions  fought  to  an  issue  by  France  and  Spain,  Eng- 
land and  Holland.  And  in  these  decisions  the  two  grand  organizers  of  the  Late 
religion  of  the  West  were  ever  present,  ever  opposed. 

V 

Intellectual  creativeness  of  the  Late  period  begins,  not  with,  but  after,  the 
Reformation.  Its  most  typical  creation  is  free  science.  Even  for  Luther  learning 
was  still  essentially  the  handmaid  of  theology,’"  and  Calvin  had  the  free- 
thinking  doctor  Server  burnt.  The  thought  of  the  Springtimes  — Faustian 
like  Egyptian,  Vedic,  and  Orphic  — had  felt  its  vocation  to  be  the  justification 
of  faith  by  criticism.  If  criticism  did  not  succeed,  the  critical  method  must  be 
wrong.  Knowledge  was  faith  justified,  not  faith  controverted. 

Now,  however,  the  critical  powers  of  the  city  intellect  have  become  so  great 
that  it  is  no  longer  content  to  afiirm,  but  must  test.  The  stock  of  believed 
probables,  and  especially  that  part  of  it  which  was  received  by  the  understand- 
ing and  not  the  heart,  was  the  first  obvious  target  for  dissecting  activities. 
This  distinguishes  the  Springtime  Scholasticism  from  the  actuality-philosophy 
of  the  Baroque — as  it  distinguishes  Neoplatonist  from  Islamic,  Vedic  from 
Brahmanic,  Orphic  from  Pre-Socratic,  thought.  The  (shall  we  say)  profane 
Causality  of  human  life,  the  world-around,  the  process  and  meaning  of  cog- 
nition, become  a problem.  The  Egyptian  philosophy  of  the  Middle  Kingdom 
measured  up  the  value  of  life  in  this  sense;  and  akin  to  it,  in  all  probability, 
was  the  late  pre-Confucian  philosophy  of  China  from  800  to  500  b.c.  Only  the 
book  ascribed  to  Kwan-tse  (d.  645)  remains  to  give  us  some  dim  idea  of  this 
philosophy,  but  the  indications,  slight  though  they  be,  are  that  epistemologi- 
cal and  biological  problems  occupied  the  centre  of  the  one  genuine  philosophy 
of  China,  now  utterly  lost. 

Within  Baroque  philosophy.  Western  natural-science  stands  by  itself.  No 
other  Culture  possesses  anything  like  it,  and  assuredly  it  must  have  been  from 
its  beginnings,  not  a “handmaid  of  theology,”  but  tht  servant  vf  th'^' technical 
Will-to~Power,  oriented  to  that  end  both  mathematically  and  experimentally  — 
from  its  very  foundations  a practical  mechanics.  And  as  it  is  firstly  technique  and 
only  secondly  theory,  it  must  be  as  old  as  Faustian  man  himself.  Accordingly, 
we  find  technical  works  of  an  astounding  energy  of  combination  even  by  1000,^ 
As  early  as  the  thirteenth  century  Robert  Grosseteste  ^ was  treating  space  as  a 
function  of  light.  Petrus  Peregrinus  in  1x89  wrote  the  best  experimentally 

^ Qocks  being  an  outstanding  example.  See  Vol.  I.,  p.  15,  foot-note.  — Tr. 

2 The  famous  Bishop  of  Lincoln  (1175-1x53),  scholar  and  philosopher,  scientist  and  statesman 
— the  British  Oresme.  — Tr, 


, PYTHAGOJiAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  , |oi 

based  treatise  on  magnetism  that  appeared  before  Gilbert  (1600).  .And  Roger 
Bacon,  the  disciple  of  both,  deTcloped  a oamral-scientific  theorj  of  knowledge 
to  serve  as  basis  for  his  technical  investigations,^  But  boldness  in  the  discoveiy:' 
of  dynamic  interlinkages  went  further  still.  The  Copernican  system  was  hinted' 
at  in  a manuscript  of  and  a few  decades  later  was  mathematically  developed . 
by  the  Paris  Occamists,  Buridan,  Albert  of  Saxony,  and  Oresme.-  Let  us  not  de-, 
ceivc  ourselves  as  to  the  fundamental  motive-power  of  these  explorations.  Pure 
contemplative  philosophy  could  have  dispensed  with  experiment  for  ever,  but 
not  so  the  Faustian  symbol  of  the  machimy  which  urged  us  to  mechanical  con- 
structions even  in  the  twelfth  century  and  made  **  Ferptmm  mobile  ' the 
Prometheus-idea  of  the  Western  intellect.  For  us  the  first  thing  is  ever  the 
working  hypothesis  — the  very  kind  of  thought-product  that  is  meaningless  to 
other  Cultures,  It  is  an  astounding  fact  (to  which,  however,  we  must  accustom 
ourselves)  that  the  idea  of  immediately  exploiting  in  practice  any  knowledge  of 
natural  relations  that  may  be  acquired  is  alien  to  every  sort  of  mankind  except 
the  Faustian  (and  those  who,  like  Japanese,  Jews,  and  Russians,  have  to-day 
come  under  the  intellectual  spell  of  its  Civilization).  The  very  notion  of  the 
working  hypothesis  implicitly  contains  a dynamic  lay-out  of  the  universe. 
Theoria,  contemplative  vision  of  actuality,  was  for  those  subtly  inquiring 
monks  only  secondary,  and,  being  itself  the  outcome  of  the  technical  passion, 
it  presently  led  them,  quite  imperceptibly,  to  the  typically  Faustian  conception 
of  God  as  the  Grand  Master  of  the  machine,  who  could  accomplish  everything 
that  they  themselves  in  their  impotence  only  dared  to  wish.  Insensibly  the 
world  of  God  became,  century  by  century,  more  and  more  like  the  Perpetmm 
mobile.  And,  imf^rceptibly  also,  as  the  scanning  of  nature  became  sharper  and 
sharper  in  the  school  of  experiment  and  technique,  and  the  Gothic  myth  be- 
came more  and  more  shadowy,  the  concepts  of  monkish  working  hypotheses 
developed,  from  Galileo  onwards,  into  the  critically  illuminated  numina  of 
modern  science,  the  collisions  and  the  fields,  gravitation,  the  velocity  of  light, 
and  the  “electricity’’  which  in  our  electrodynamic  world-picture  has  absorbed 
into  itself  the  other  forms  of  energy  and  thereby  attained  to  a sort  of  physical 
monotheism.  They  are  the  concepts  that  are  set  up  behind  the  formulae,  to 
endow  them  with  a mythic  visibility  for  the  inner  eye.  The  numbers  themselves 
are  technical  elements,  levers  and  screws,  overheatings  of  the  world’s  secrets. 
The  Classical  Nature-thought  — and  that  of  others  also  — required  no  numbers, 
for  it  strove  for  no  powers.  The  pure  mathematic  of  Pythagoras  and  Plato  had 
no  relation  whatever  to  the  nature-views  of  Democritus  and  Aristotle. 

^ A clear  summary  of  Grosseteste*s,  Pierre  dc  Maricourt’s,  and  Roger  Bacon's  work  and  out- 
look will  be  found  in  Ch.  ix  of  E.  Gilson's  short  manual,  La  Lhilosophie  du  Mcym  Age  (Paris,  19x5). 
Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  may  also  be  consulted  for  Roger  Bacon,  but  the  article  "Grosseteste’'  deals  al- 
most entirely  with  the  bishop's  political  and  ecclesiastical  career.  — Tr, 

® M.  Baumgartner,  Gesch.  der  Philos,  des  Mittelaltm  (1915),  pp.  41^,  571,  620,  et  seq.  [Brief 
account  in  Ch.  xi  (3)  of  Gilson’s  manual  above  cited.  — Tr,] 


^ DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

Jmst  as  the  Classical  mind  felt  Prometheus’s  defiance  of  the  gods  as  “ hybris,” 
so  our  Baroque  felt  the  machine  as  diabolical.^  The  spirit  of  Hell  had  betrayed 
to  man  the  secret  of  mastering  the  world-mechanism  and  even  of  himself 
enacting  the  part  of  God.  And  hence  it  is  that  all  purely  priestly  natureSj  that 
live  wholly  in  the  world  of  the  spirit  and  expect  nothing  of  “this  world”  — 
and  notably  the  idealist  philosophers,  the  Classicists,  the  Humanists,  and  even 
Nietsische  — have  for  technique  nothing  but  silent  hostility. 

Every  Late  philosophy  contains  this  critical  protest  against  the  uncritical 
intuitiveness  of  the  Spring.  But  this  criticism  of  the  intellect  that  is  sure  of  its 
own  superiority  aifects  also  faith  itself  and  evokes  the  one  great  creation  in  the 
field  of  religion  that  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  Late  period — every  Late  period 

— namely,  Puritanism. 

Puritanism  manifests  itself  in  the  army  of  Cromwell  and  his  Independents, 
iron,  Bible-firm,  psalm-singing  as  they  rode  into  battle;  in  the  ranks  of  the 
Pythagoreans,  who  in  the  bitter  earnest  of  their  gospel  of  duty  wrecked  gay 
Sybaris  and  branded  it  for  ever  as  the  city  without  morals;  in  the  armies  of  the 
early  Caliphs,  which  subdued  not  only  states,  but  souls.  Milton’s  Paradise 
many  surahs  of  the  Koran,  the  little  that  we  know  of  Pythagorean  teachings  — 
all  come  to  the  same  thing.  They  are  enthusiasms  of  a sober  spirit,  cold  in- 
tensities, dry  mysticism,  pedantic  ecstasy.  And  yet,  even  so,  a wild  piety 
flickers  up  once  more  in  them.  All  the  transcendent  inwardness  that  the  City 
Gfn  produce  after  attaining  to  unconditional  mastery  over  the  soul  of  the  Land 
is  here  concentrated,  with  a sort  of  terror  lest  it  should  prove  unreal  and  evanes- 
cent, and  is  correspondingly  impatient,  pitiless,  and  unforgiving.  Puritanism 

— not  in  the  West  only,  but  in  all  Cultures  — lacks  the  smile  that  had  illumined 
the  religion  of  the  Spring  — every  Spring  — the  moments  of  profound  joy  in 
life,  the  humour  of  life.  Nothing  of  the  quiet  blissfulness  that  in  the  Magian 
Springtime  flashes  up  so  often  in  the  stories  of  Jesus’s  childhood,  or  in  Gregory 
Nazianizen,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Koran,  nothing  in  the  palpable  blitheness  of 
St.  Francis’s  songs  in  Milton.  Deadly  earnest  broods  over  the  Jansenist  mind 
of  Port  Royal,  over  the  meetings  of  the  black-clothed  Roundheads,  by  whom 
Shakespeare’s  “Merry  England”  — Sybaris  over  again  — was  annihilated  in  a 
few  years.  Now  for  the  first  time  the  battle  against  the  Devil,  whose  bodily 
nearness  they  all  felt,  was  fought  with  a dark  and  bitter  fury.  In  the  seventeenth 
century  more  than  a million  witches  were  burnt  — alike  in  the  Protestant 
North,  the  Catholic  South,  and  even  the  communities  in  America  and  India. 
Joyless  and  sour  are  the  duty-doctrines  of  Islam  (fikJS),  with  its  hard  intellectu- 
ality, and  the  Westminster  Catechisms  of  1643,  and  the  Jansenist  ethics  (Jansen’s 
Augustinus,  1640)  as  well  — for  in  the  realm  of  Loyola,  too,  there  was  of  in- 
ward necessity  a Puritan  movement.  Religion  is  livingly  experienced  meta- 
physic, but  the  company  of  the  “ godly,”  as  the  Independents  called  themselves, 

1 See  Ch.  XIV  below.  — Tr. 


PYTHAGORAS,,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL;  303 

and  the  Pjthagoreans,  and  the  disciples  of  Mohammed,  all  alike  cxpeficncedit, ; 
not,  with  the  senses,  but  primarily  as  a concept.  Parshva,  who  about ','600  b.c.', 
founded  thC'Scct  of  the  “Unfettered,*'  ^ on  the  Ganges,  taught,  like  the  other, 
Puritans' of  his  ■time,  that  salvation  came,  not  from  sacrifices  and  righ'ts,:  buf 
only  from  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  Atman  and  Brahman.  , In  all  Puritan 
poetry  the  place  of  the  old  Gothic  visions  is  taken  by  an  unbridled,  yet  withal 
.jejune,  spirit  of  allegory.  In  the  waking-consciousness  of  these  ascetics,  the 
concept  is  the  only  real  power.  PascaPs  wrestlings  were  about  concepts  and 
not,  like  Meister  Eckart’s,  about  shapes.  Witches  were  burnt  because  they  were 
proved,  and  not  because  they  were  seen  in  the  air  o*  nights;  the  Protestant 
jurists  employed  the  witches*  hammer  of  the  Dominicans  because  it  was  built 
on  concepts.  The  Madonnas  of  the  early  Gothic  had  appeared  to  their  sup- 
pliants, but  those  of  Bernini  no  man  ever  saw.  They  exist  because  they  are 
proved  — and  there  came  to  be  a positive  enthusiasm  for  existence  of  this  sort, 
Milton,  Cromweirs  great  secretary  of  state,  clothed  concepts  with  shapes,  and 
Bunyan  brings  a whole  mythology  of  concepts  into  ethical-allegorical  activity. 
From  that  it  is  but  a step  to  Kant,  in  wHose  conceptual  ethics  the  Devil  assumes 
his  final  shape  as  the  Radically  Evil 

We  have  to  emancipate  ourselves  from  the  surfaces  of  history  — and, 
especially,  to  thrust  aside  the  artificial  fences  in  which  the  methodology  of 
Western  sciences  has  paddocked  it  — before  we  can  see  that  Pythagoras, 
Mohammed,  and  Cromwell  embody  one  and  the  same  movement  in  three  Cul- 
tures. 

Pythagoras  was  not  a philosopher-  According  to  all  statements  of  the  Pre- 
Socratics,  he  was  a saint,  prophet  and  founder  of  a fanatically  religious  society 
that  forced  its  truths  upon  the  people  around  it  by  every  political  and  military 
means.  The  destruction  of  Sybaris  by  Croton  — an  event  which,  we  may  be 
sure,  has  survived  in  historical  memory  only  because  it  was  the  climax  of  a wild 
religious  war  — was  an  explosion  of  the  same  hate  that  saw  in  Charles  I and 
his  gay  Cavaliers  not  merely  doctrinal  error,  but  also  worldly  disposition  as 
something  that  must  be  destroyed  root  and  branch.  A myth  purified  and 
conceptually  fortified,  combined  wkh  rigorous  ethical  precepts,  imbued  the 
Pythagoreans  with  the  conviction  that  they  would  attain  salvation  before  all 
other  men.  The  gold  tablets  found  in  Thurii  and  Petelia,  which  were  put  into 
the  hand  of  the  dead  initiate,  carried  the  assurance  of  the  god:  “Happy  and 
blessed  one,  thou  shalt  be  no  more  a mortal,  but  a god.*’  It  is  the  same  cer- 
tainty that  the  Koran  gave  to  all  believers  who  fought  in  the  holy  war  against 
the  infidel  — “The  monasticism  of  Islam  is  the  religious  war,**  says  a hadith 
of  the  Prophet  — the  same  which  filled  Cromwell’s  Ironsides  when  they  scat- 
tered the  King’s  “ Philistines”  and  **Am^Iekites”  at  Marston  Moor  and  Naseby. 

Islam  was  no  more  a religion  of  the  desert  in  particular  than  Zwingli’s 
1 Nigaatha.  See  Ency.  Bfi#.,  KI  cd.,  article  ‘*Jains.”  — Tr. 


304^^:^;^  : ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ; \ 

faith  was  a religion  of  the  high  mountains  in  particular.  It  is  incidentj  and  no 
morCj  that  the  Puritan  movement  for  which  the  Magian  world  was  ripe  pro- 
ceeded from  a man  of  Mecca  and  not  from  a Monophysite  or  a Jew.  For  in  the 
northern  Arabian  desert  there  were  the  Christian  states  of  the  Ghassanids  and 
Lakhmids,  and  in  the  Sab^an  South  there  were  religious  wars  waged  between 
Christians  and  Jews  that  involved  the  world  of  states  from  Assuan  to  the 
Sassanid  Empire.  The  Congress  of  Princes  at  Marib  ^ was  attended  by  hardly  a 
single  pa;gan,  and  shortly  after  this  date  South  Arabia  came  under  Persian — 
that  is,  Mazdaist  — government.  Mecca  was  a little  island  of  ancient  Arabian 
paganism  in  the  midst  of  a world  of  Jews  and  Christians,  a mere  relic  that  had 
long  been  mined  by  the  ideas  of  the  great  Magian  religions.  The  little  of  this 
paganism  that  filtered  into  the  Koran  was  later  explained  away  by  the  Com- 
mentary of  the  Sunna  and  its  Syro-Mesopotamian  intellect.  At  most  Islam  was 
a new  religion  only  to  the  same  extent  as  Lutheranism  was  one. ^ Actually, 
it  was  the  prolongation  of  the  great  early  religions.  Equally,  its  expansion 
was  not  (as  is  even  now  imagined)  a '‘migration  of  peoples”  proceeding  from 
the  Arabian  Peninsula,  but  an  onslaught  of  enthusiastic  believers,  which  like 
ah  avalanche  bore  along  with  it  Christians,  Jews,  and  Mazdaists  and  set  them 
at  once  in  its  front  rank  as  fanatical  Moslems.  It  was  Berbers  from  the  homeland 
of  St.  Augustine  who  conquered  Spain,  and  Persians  from  Irak  who  drove  on  to 
the  Oxus.  The  enemy  of  yesterday  became  the  front-rank  comrade  of  to- 
morrow. Most  of  the  "Arabs”  who  in  717  attacked  Constantinople  for  the 
first  time,  had  been  born  Christians.  About  650  Byzantine  literature  ® quite 
suddenly  vanished,  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  fact  has  so  far  never  been 
noticed  — it  was  just  that  the  Arabian  literature  took  up  the  tale.  The  soul  of 
the  Magian  Culture  found  at  last  its  true  expression  in  Islam,  and  therewith 
became  truly  the  "Arabian,”  free  thenceforth  from  all  bondage  to  the  Pseudo- 
morphosis.  The  Iconoclastic  movement,  led  by  Islam,  but  long  prepared  by 
Monophysites  and  Jews,  advanced  to  and  even  beyond  Byzantium,  where  the 
Syrian  Leo  III  (717-41)  raised  this  Puritan  movement  of  Islamic-Christian 
sects  — the  Paulicians  about  650  and  the  Bogomils  later  ^ — to  predominance. 

The  great  figures  of  Mohammed's  entourage,  such  as  Abu  Bekr  and  Omar, 
are  the  near  relatives  of  the  Pyms  and  Hampdens  of  the  English  Revolution, 
and  we  should  see  this  relationship  to  be  nearer  still  if  we  knew  more  than  we 
do  about  the  Hanifs,  the  Arabian  Puritans  before  and  about  the  Prophet.  All 
of  them  had  won  out  of  Predestination  the  guarantee  that  they  were  God's 

^ 541.  See  p.  197. 

2 “Mahommedanism  must  be  regarded  as  an  eccentric  heretical  form  of  Eastern  Christianity. 
This  in  fact  was  the  ancient  mode  of  regarding  Mahommet.  He  was  considered,  not  in  the  iigJht 
of  the  founder  of  a new  religion,  but  rather  as  one  of  the  chief  heresiarchs  of  the  Church.  Among 
them  he  is  placed  by  Dante  in  the  “Inferno.*"  Dean  Stanley,  Eastern  Church  (1861),  Lecture  Vin. 

— Tr. 

® Kmmbacher,  By^ant.  Literaturgesch.,  p.  12., 

^ See  Ency,  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  under  these  names.  — Tr. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL,  .,305 

elect*  The  grand  Old  Testament  exaltation  of  .Parliament  and,,  the  camps  of 
Independency  ~ which  left  behio.d  it,  in  many  an  .English  family,  even  ,to  the 
nineteenth  century,^  the  belief  that  the  English  are  the  descendants  of  the  ten 
Lost  Tribes  of  Israel,  a nation  of  saints  predestined  to  govern  the  world  — 
dominated  also  the  emigration  to  America  which  began  with  t.he  Pilgrim 
Fathers  of  1610.  It  formed  that  which... may  be  called  the'  American  reIigio,n  of 
to-day,  and  bred  and  fostered  the  trait  which  gives  the  Englishman  even  now 
his  particular  political  insouciance,  an  assurance  that  is  essentially  religious 
and  has  its  roots  in  predestination.  The  .Pythagoreans ' themselves,  too  (an 
unheard-of  thing  in  the  religious  history  of  the  Classical  ■ world)  .assumed 
political  power  for  the  furtherance  of  religious  ends  and.  sought  to  advance  their 
Puritanism  from  Polls  to  Polis.  Everywhere  else  unit  cults  reigned  in  unit 
states,  each  of  which  left  the  other  unconcernedly  to  its  own  religious  duties; 
here  and  here  only  do  we  find  a community  of  saints,  and  their  practical  energy 
as  far  surpassed  that  of  the  old  Orphics  as  fighting  Independency  surpassed  the 
spirit  of  the  Reformation  wars. 

But  in  Puritanism  there  is  hidden  already- the  seed  of  Rationalism,  and  after 
a few  enthusiastic  generations  have  passed,  this  bursts  forth  everywhere  and 
makes  itself  supreme.  This  is  the  step  from  Cromwell  to  Hume.  Not  cities  in 
general,  not  even  the  great  cities,  but  a few  particular  cities  now  become  the 
theatre  of  intellectual  history  — Socratic  Athens,  Abbassid  Baghdad,  eighteenth- 
century  London  and  Paris.^  ‘‘Enlightenment’*  is  the  cliche  of  that  time.  The 
sun  bursts  forth  — but  what  is  it  that  dears  off  the  heavens  of  the  critical 
consciousness  to  make  way  for  that  sun?  . 

Rationalism  signifies  the  belief  in  the  data  of  critical  understanding  (that 
is,  of  the  “reason”)  alone.  In  the  Springtime  men  could  say  Credo  quia  ah- 
surdum,'*  because  they  were  certain  that  the  comprehensible  and  the  incom- 
prehensible were  both  necessary  constituents  of  the  world  — the  nature  which 
Giotto  painted,  in  which  the  Mystics  immersed  themselves,  and  into  which 
reason  can  penetrate,  but  only  so  far  as  the  deity  permits  it  to  penetrate*  But 
now  a secret  jealousy  breeds  the  notion  of  the  Irrational  — that  which,  as 
incomprehensible,  is  therefore  valueless.  It  may  be  scorned  openly  as  super- 
stition, or  privily  as  mctaphysic.  Only  critically-established  understanding 
possesses  value.  And  secrets  are  merely  evidences  of  ignorance*  The  new 
semtkss  religion  is  in  its  highest  potentialities  called  wisdom  (uo^k),  its  priests 
philosophers,  and  its  adherents  “educated*^  people.  According  to  Aristotle, 
the  old  religion  is  indispensable  only  to  the  uneducated,®  and  his  view  is  Con- 
fucius’s and  Gotama  Buddha’s,  Lessing’s  and  Voltaire’s*  Men  go  away  from 
Culture  “back  to  nature,”  but  this  nature  is  not  something  livingly  ex- 

^ Not  to  saj  the  twentieth.  — Tr*  . 

* To  which  may  he  added  Edinhmrgh.  — Tr. 

® r^p  rufP  TpXKup,  Metapi^sks  XI,  8,  p,  1074  (Bckkcr)  13.  — Tr, 


^o6.:  r.  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

perienced,,  blit  soincthiog  proved,  something  bom  of,  and  accessible  only  to,  the 
mtellect  — a Nature  that  has  no  existence  at  ail  lor  a. peasantry,  a Nature  by 
which  one  is  not  in  the  least  overawed  but  merely  put  into  a condition  of  sensi- 
bility. Natural  religion,*  rational  religion,  Deism  — all  this  is  not  lived  meta- 
physics, but  a comprehended  mcchaaics,  called  by  Confucius  the  ‘'Laws  of 
Heaven^’  and  by  Hellenism  Formerly  philosophy  was  the  handmaid  of 

transcendent  religiousness,  but  now  comes  sensibility,  and  philosophy  must 
therefore  become  scientific  as  epistemology  and  critique  of  nature  and  critique  of 
values.  No  doubt  there  was  a feeling  that  this  philosophy  was,  even  so,  nothing 
but  a diluted  dogmatism,  for  the  idea  that  pure  knowledge  was-passBk  itself 
involved  a belief.  Systems  were  woven  out  of  phenomenally  guaranteed  be- 
ginnings, but  in  the  long  run  the  result  was  merely  to  say  “Force''  instead  of 
“God,"  and  “Conservation  of  Energy"  instead  of  “Eternity."  Under  ail 
Classical  rationalism  is  to  be  found  Olympus,  under  all  Western  the  dogma,  of 
the  sacraments.  And  so  our  Western  philosophy  swings  to  and  fro  between 
religion  and  technical  science,  and  is  defined  thus,  or  thus,  according  as  the 
author  of  the  definition  is  a man  with  some  relic  of  priesthood  still  in  him,  or  is 
a pure  expert  and  technician  of  thought. 

""Wdtansschauung*  is  the  characteristic  expression  for  an  enlightened 
waking-consciousness  that,  under  the  guidance  of  the  critical  understanding, 
looks  about  it  in  a godless  light-world  and,  when  sense-perceptions  are  found 
not  to  square  with  sound  human  reason,  treats  sense  as  a ‘‘  lying  jade."  That 
which  was  once  myth  — the  actualcst  of  the  actual  — is  now  subjected  to 
the  methods  of  what  is  called  Euhemerism.  The  learned  Euhemcrus,  about 
300  B.C.,  “explained"  the  Classical  divinities  to  the  public  that  they  had 
formerly  served  so  well,  and  the  process  occurs  under  one  form  or  another  in 
every  “age  of  enlightenment."  We  have  our  Euhemeristic  interpretations  of 
Hell  as  a guilty  conscience,  the  Devil  as  evil  desire,  and  God  as  the  beauty  of 
nature,  and  it  is  the  same  tendency  that  declares  itself  when  Attic  romb-in- 
scriptions  of  about  400  invoke,  not  the  city-goddess  Athene,  but  a goddess 
“Demos"  — a near  relation,  by  the  way,  of  the  Jacobins'  Goddess  of  Reason 
— and  where  the  dai}wvbv  for  Socrates,  pods  for  other  philosophers,  take  the 
place  of  Zeus.  Confucius  says  “heaven"  instead  of  “Shang-ti,"  which  means 
that  he  believes  only  in  laws  of  nature.  The  “collection"  and  “ordering"  of 
the  canonical  writings  of  China  by  the  Confucians  was  a colossal  act  of  Euhemer- 
ism,  in  which  actually  almost  all  the  old  religious  works  were  literally  de- 
stroyed and  the  residue  subjected  to  rationalist  falsification.  Had  it  been 
possible,  the  enlighteners  of  out  eighteenth  century  would  no  doubt  have 
served  the  Gothic  heritage  in  the  same  way.^  Confucius  belongs  to  the  Chinese 

^ Caliphs  like  A1  Maimim  C8i3~53)  the  last  Ommayads  would  have  entirely  approved  of 
similar  measures  in  Islam.  In  those  times  there  was  a club  in  Baghdad  in  which  Christians,  Jews, 
Moslems,  and  Atheists  debated,  and  appeals  to  the  authority  of  Bible  or  Koran  were  '*out  of  order." 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  ,30, 

“eigiitecGth  century**  through  mi  through.  Lao-tse  (who  despised  him) 
stands  at  a midpoint  in  the  Taoist  movement,  which  manifested  traits  of 
Protestantism',  Puritanism,  and  Pietism  in  turn,  and  both  finally  propagated  a 
practical  world-tone  based,  upon  a wholly  mechanistic  world-view.  The 
wo.rd  underwent  in  the  Late  period  of  China  just  the  same  continuous 

alteration  of  its  fundamental  content,  and  in  the  same  mechanistic  direction, 
as  the  word  Logos’*  in  the  history  of  Classical  thought  from 'Heraclitus  to 
Posidonius,  and  as  the  "word  ** Force’*  between  Galileo’s  day  and  ours.  That 
which  once  had  been  grandly  moulded  myth  and  cult  is  called,  in  this  “religion 
of  educated  people,**  Nature  mi  Virtue  — but  this  Nature  is  a reasonable 
mechanism,  and  this  Virtue  is  knowledge.^  Confucius  and  Buddha,  Socrates 
and  Rousseau  are  at  one  in  this.  Confucius  contains  little  of  prayer  or  of  medi- 
tation upon  the  life  after,  death,  and  nothing  at  all  of  revelation.  To  busy 
on<?self  overmuch  with  sacrifices  and  rites  stamps  one  as  uneducated  and  un- 
reasoning. Gotama  Buddha  and  his  contemporary  Mahavira,  the  founder  of 
Jainism  ^ — both  of  whom  came  from  the  political  world  of  the  lower  Ganges, 
east  of  the  old  Brahmaoic  Culture-field  — recognized,  as  everyone  knows, 
neither  the  idea  of  God  nor  myth  and  cult.  Of  the  real  teaching  of  Buddha 
little  can  now  be  ascertained  — for  it  all  appears  in  the  colours  of  the  later 
fellah-religion  baptized  by  his  name  — but  one  of  the  unquestionably  authentic 
ideas  concerning  “conditioned  arising**  ® is  the  derivation  of  suffering ig- 
norame  — ignorance,  namely,  of  the  “Four  Noble  Truths.**  This  is  true  ra- 
tionalism. Nirvana,  for  them,  is  a purely  intellectual  release  and  corresponds 
exactly  with -the  “Autarkeia**  and  “Eudaimonia”  of  the  Stoics.  It  is  that 
condition  of  the  understanding  and  waking-consciousness  for  which  Being  no 
longer  is.  / " ■ ' , ,■ 

The  great  ideal  of  the  educated  of  such  periods  is  the  Sage.  The  sage  goes 
back  to  Nature  — to  Ferney  or  Ermenonville,  to  Attic  gardens  or  Indian  groves 
— which  is  the  most  intellectual  way  of  being  a megalopolitan.  The  sage  is  the 
man  of  the  Golden  Mean.  His  askesis  consists  in  a judicious  depreciation  of 
the  world  in  favour  of  meditation.  The  wisdom  of  the  enlightenment  never 
interferes  with  comfort.  Moral  with  the  great  Myth  to  back  it  is  always  a 
sacrifice,  a cult,  even  to  extremes  of  asceticism,  even  to  death;  but  Virtue  with 
Wisdom  at  its  back  is  a sort  of  secret  enjoyment,  a superfine  intellectual  egoism. 
And  so  the  ethical  teacher  who  is  outside  real  religion  becomes  the  Philistine. 
Buddha,  Confucius,  Rousseau,  are  arch-Philistines,  for  all  the  nobility  of  their 

^ Whereas  in  Dante  always  carries  a connotation  of  vital  force,  as  also  docs  the  older 

English  use  of  the  word;  c.g.,  in  Chaucer’s  ‘"of  which  vertue  engendred  is  the  flour,"  (Canterbury 
Tales,  PtoL  4)  and  in  the  Bible  (Mark  v,  30).  In  Mediaeval  Latin  vinutes*  is  used  for  miracles.  — 

Tf, . . 

® See  'Bncy.  Brit.,  XI  cd.,  article  "Jains."  — Tr. 

® E.g.,  " Given  eye  and  visible  object,  visual  consciousness  arises;  the  conjunction  of  the  three 
is  contact;  whereby  conditioned,  arises  feeling;  whereby  conditioned,  arises  perception.  . . 
Majjima  Nikhaya,  I,  iii  (quoted  by  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  — Tr, 


3o8  ' : \ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

ordered  ideas,  and  the  pedantry  of  the  Socratic  life-wisdom  is  insurmount- 
able. 

Along  with  this  (shall  we  call  it)  scholasticism  of  sane  reason,  there  must 
of  inner  necessity  be  a rationalistic  mysticism  of  the  educated.  The  Western 
Enlightenment  is  of  English  origin  and  Puritan  parentage.  The  rationalism 
of  the  Continent  comes  wholly  from  Locke.  In  opposition  to  it  there  arose  in 
Germany  the  Pietists  (Herrnhut,  1700,  Spener  and  Francke,  and  in  Wiirttemberg 
Oetinger)  and  in  England  the  Methodists  (Wesley  “awakened''  by  Herrnhut, 
1738).  It  was  Luther  and  Calvin  over  again  — the  English  at  once  organ- 
ked  themselves  for  a world-movement  and  the  Germans  lost  themselves  in 
mid-European  conventicles.  The  Pietists  of  Islam  are  to  be  found  in  Sufism^ 
which  is  not  of  “Persian”  but  of  common  Aramaean  origin  and  in  the  eighth 
century  spread  all  over  the  Arabian  world.  Pietists  or  Methodists,  too,  are 
the  Indian  lay  preachers,  who  shortly  before  Buddha's  time  were  teaching 
release  from  the  cycle  of  life  (sansard)  through  immersion  in  the  identity  of 
Atman  and  Brahman.  But  Pietists  or  Methodists,  too,  are  Lao-tse  and  his 
disciples  and — notwithstanding  their  rationalism  — the  Cynic  mendicants 
and  itinerant  preachers  and  the  Stoic  tutors,  domestic  chaplains,  and  confessors 
of  early  Hellenism.^  And  Pietism  may  ascend  even  to  the  peak  of  rationalist 
vision,  of  which  Swedenborg  is  the  great  example,  which  created  for  Stoics 
and  Sufists  whole  worlds  of  fancy,  and  by  which  Buddhism  was  prepared  for  its 
reconstruction  as  Mahay  ana.  The  expansion  of  Buddhism  and  that  of  Taoism 
in  their  original  significations  are  closely  analogous  to  the  Methodist  expansion 
in  America,  and  it  is  no  accident  that  they  both  reached  their  full  maturity  in 
those  regions  (lower  Ganges  and  south  of  the  Yang-tse-kiang)  which  had 
cradled  the  respective  Cultures. 

VI 

Two  centuries  after  Puritanism  the  mechanistic  conception  of  the  world 
stands  at  its  zenith.  It  is  the  effective  religion  of  the  time.  Even  those  who 
still  thought  themselves  to  be  religious  in  the  old  sense,  to  be  “believers  in 
God,"  were  only  mistaking  the  world  in  which  their  waking-consciousness 
was  mirroring  itself.  Religious  truths  were  always  in  their  understanding 
mechanistic  truths,  and  in  general  it  was  only  the  habit  of  traditional  words 
that  imparted  a colour-wash  of  myth  to  a Nature  that  was  in  reality  regarded 
scientifically.  Culture  is  ever  synonymous  with  religious  creativeness-  Every 
great  Culture  begins  with  a mighty  theme  that  rises  out  of  the  pre-urban 
country-side,  is  carried  through  in  the  cities  of  art  and  intellect,  and  closes  with 
a finale  of  materialism  in  the  world-cities.  But  even  the  last  chords  are  strictly 
in  the  key  of  the  whole.  There  are  Chinese,  Indian,  Classical,  Arabian,  Western 
materialisms,  and  each  is  nothing  but  the  original  stock  of  myth-shapes,  cleared 
^ Gercke-Nordcn,  EtnUit,  in  Mt  Mtwtumswiss.^  11,  no. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  309 

of  the  elements  of  experience  and  contemplatiye  vision  and  viewed  mechan- 
istically., 

Confucianism  as  feasoned  out  by  Yang-Chu  concluded  in  this  sense.  The 
system  of  Lakayata  was  the  prolongation  of  the  contempt  for  a de-souled  world 
which  had  been  the  common  characteristic  of  Gotama  Buddha,  Mahavira,  and 
the  contemporary  Pietists,  and  which  they  in  turn  had  derived  from  Sankhya 
atheism.  Socrates  is  alike  the  heir  of  the  Sophists  and  the  ancestor  of  the  Cynic 
itinerants  and  of  Pyrrhonian  skepsis.  All  are  manifestations  of  the  superiority 
of  the  mcgalopolitan  intellect  that  has  done  with  the  irrational  for  good  and  all 
and  despises  any  waking-consciousness  that  still  knows  or  acknowledges 
mysteries.  Gothic  men  shrank  at  every  step  before  the  fathomless,  more  awe- 
inspiring still  as  presented  in  dogmatic  truths.  But  to-day  even  the  Catholic 
has  arrived  at  the  point  of  feeling  these  dogmas  as  a successful  systematic  ex- 
position of  the  riddle  of  the  universe.  The  miracle  is  regarded  as  a physical 
occurrence  of  a higher  order,  and  an  English  bishop  professes  his  belief  in  the 
possibility  of  electric  power  and  the  power  of  prayer  both  originating  in  one 
homogeneous  nature-system.^  The  belief  is  belief  in  force  and  matter,  even  if 
the  words  used  be  “God**  and  “world,**  “Providence**  and  “man.** 

Unique  and  self-contained,  again,  is  the  Faustian  materialism,  in  the  nar- 
rower sense  of  the  word.  In  it  the  technical  outlook  upon  the  world  reached  ful- 
filment. The  whole  world  a dynamic  system,  exact,  mathematically  disposed, 
capable  down  to  its  first  causes  of  being  experimentally  probed  and  numerically 
fixed  so  that  man  can  dominate  it  — this  is  what  distinguishes  our  particular 
“return  to  Nature**  from  all  others.  That  “Knowledge  is  Virtue’*  Confucius 
also  believed,  and  Buddha,  and  Socrates,  but  “Knowledge  is  Power**  is  a phrase 
that  possesses  meaning  only  within  the  European-American  Civilmation. 
“Return  to  nature*’  here  means  the  elimination  of  all  forces  that  stand  between 
the  practical  intelligence  and  nature  * — everywhere  else  materialism  has  con- 
tented itself  with  establishing  (by  way  of  contemplation  or  logic,  as  the  case 
may  be)  supposedly  simple  units  whose  causal  play  accounts  for  everything 
without  any  residue  of  secrets,  the  supernatural  being  put  down  to  want  of 
knowledge.  But  the  grand  intellectual  myth  of  Energy  and  Mass  is  at  the  same 
time  a vast  working  hypothesis.  It  draws  the  picture  of  nature  in  such  a way  that 
men  can  me  it.  The  Destiny  element  is  mechanized  as  evolution,  development, 
progress,  and  put  into  the  centre  of  the  system;  the  Will  is  an  albumen-process; 
and  all  these  doctrines  of  Monism,  Darwinism,  Positivism,  and  what  not  are 
elevated  into  the  fitness-moral  which  is  the  beacon  of  American  business  men, 
British  politicians,  and  German  progress-Philistincs  alike  — and  turns  out,  in 
the  last  analysis,  to  be  nothing  but  an  intellectualist  caricature  of  the  old  justi- 
fication by  faith. 

^ Compare  the  renewed  controversy  as  to  Transnbstantiation  in  the  English  Church,  1916-8, 
in  which  a bishop  actually  proposed  that  physical  tests  could  be  applied  to  the  altar-miracle.  — Tr. 


310  ^ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

Materialism  would  not  be  complete  without  the  need  of  now  and  again 
casing  the  intellectual  tension,  by  giving  way  to  moods  of  myth,  by  performing 
rites  of  some  sort,  or  by  enjoying  with  an  inward  light-heartedness  the  charms 
of  the  irrational,  the  unnatural,  the  repulsive,  and  even,  if  need  be,  the  merely 
silly.  This  tendency,  which  is  visible  enough,  even  to  us,  in  the  times  of  Meng- 
tse  (37X--i89)  and  in  those  of  the  first  Buddhist  brotherhoods,  is  present  also 
(and  with  the  same  significance)  in  Hellenism,  of  which  indeed  it  is  a leading 
characteristic.  About  311  poetical  scholars  of  the  Callimachus  type  in  Alex- 
andria invented  the  Serapis-cult  and  provided  it  with  an  elaborate  legend.  The 
Isis-cult  in  Republican  Rome  was  something  very  different  both  from  the 
emperor-worship  that  succeeded  it  and  from  the  deeply  earnest  Isis-religion  of 
Egypt;  it  was  a religious  pastime  of  high  society,  which  at  times  provoked 
public  ridicule  and  at  times  led  to  public  scandal  and  the  closing  of  the  cult- 
centres.  ^ The  Chaldean  astrology  was  in  those  days  a fashion very  far  removed 
from  the  genuine  Classical  belief  in  oracles  and  from  the  Magian  faith  in  the 
might  of  the  hour.  It  was  “relaxation,”  a “let’s  pretend.”  And,  over  and 
above  this,  there  were  the  numberless  charlatans  and  fake  prophets  who  toured 
the  towns  and  sought  with  their  pretentious  rites  to  persuade  the  half-educated 
into  a renewed  interest  in  religion.  Correspondingly,  we  have  in  the  European- 
American  world  of  to-day  the  occultist  and  theosophist  fraud,  the  American 
Christian  Science,  the  untrue  Buddhism  of  drawing-rooms,  the  religious  arts- 
and-crafts  business  (brisker  in  Germany  than  even  in  England)  that  caters  for 
groups  and  cults  of  Gothic  or  Late  Classical  or  Taoist  sentiment.  Everywhere 
it  is  just  a toying  with  myths  that  no  one  really  believes,  a tasting  of  cults  that 
it  is  hoped  might  fill  the  inner  void.  The  real  belief  is  always  the  belief  in 
atoms  and  numbers,  but  it  requires  this  highbrow  hocus-pocus  to  make  it 
bearable  in  the  long  run.  Materialism  is  shallow  and  honest,  mock-re- 
ligion shallow  and  dishonest.  But  the  fact  that  the  latter  is  possible  at  all 
foreshadows  a new  and  genuine  spirit  of  seeking  that  declares  itself,  first  quietly, 
but  soon  emphatically  and  openly,  in  the  civilized  waking-consciousness. 

This  next  phase  I call  the  Second  Religiousness.  It  appears  in  all  Civilizations 
as  soon  as  they  have  fully  formed  themselves  as  such  and  are  beginning  to  pass, 
slowly  and  imperceptibly,  into  the  non-historical  state  in  which  time-periods 
cease  to  mean  anything.  (So  far  as  the  Western  Civilization  is  concerned,  there- 
fore, we  are  still  many  generations  short  of  that  point.)  The  Second  Reli- 
giousness is  the  necessary  counterpart  of  Cxsarism,  which  is  the  final  pUtkal 
constitution  of  Late  Civilizations;  it  becomes  visible,  therefore,  in  the  Augustan 
Age  of  the  Classical  and  about  the  time  of  Shi-hwang-ti’s  time  in  China.  In 
both  phenomena  the  creative  young  strength  of  the  Early  Culture  is  lacking. 
But  both  have  their  greatness  nevertheless.  That  of  the  Second  Religiousness 

^ Which  was  ordered  no  less  than  four  times  in  the  decade  5 8”49« 

:v/:®','Horacc'’s  fine  iady,^ 


: PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  311 

coflsists  in  a deep  piety  that  fills  the  waking-consciousness  — the  piety  that 
impressed  Herodotus  in  the  (Late)  Egyptians  and  impresses  West-Eiiropeans  in 
China,  India,  and  Islam  — and  that  of  Cassarism  consists  In  its  unchained  might 
of  colossal  facts.  But  neither  in  the  creations  of  this  piety  nor  in  the  form  of 
the  Roman  Imperium  is  there  anything  primary  and  spontaneous.  Nothing  is 
built  up,  no  idea  unfolds  itself  — it  is  only  as  if  a mist  cleared  off  the  land  and 
revealed  the  old  forms,  uncertainly  at  first,  but  presently  with  increasing 
distinctness.  The  material  of  the  Second  Religiousness  is  simply  that  of  the 
first,  genuine,  young  religiousness  — only  otherwise  experienced  and  expressed. 
It  starts  with  Rationalism’s  fading  out  in  helplessness,  then  the  forms  of  the 
Springtime  become  visible,  and  finally  the  whole  world  of  the  primitive  re- 
ligion, which  had  receded  before  the  grand  forms  of  the  early  faith,  returns  to 
the  foreground,  powerful,  in  the  guise  of  the  popular  syncretism  that  is  to  be 
found  in  every  Culture  at  this  phase. 

Every  “Age  of  Enlightenment”  proceeds  from  an  unlimited  optimism  of 
the  reason  — always  associated  with  the  type  of  the  megalopolitan  — to  an 
equally  unqualified  scepticism.  The  sovereign  waking-consciousness,  cut  off 
by  walls  and  artificialities  from  living  nature  and  the  land  about  it  and  under  it, 
cognises  nothing  outside  itself.  It  applies  criticism  to  its  imaginary  world, 
which  it  has  cleared  of  everyday  sense-experience,  and  continues  to  do  so  till  it 
has  found  the  last  and  subtlest  result,  the  form  of  the  form  — itself:  namely, 
nothing.  With  this  the  possibilities  of  physics  as  a critical  mode  of  world- 
understanding  are  exhausted,  and  the  hunger  for  metaphysics  presents  itself 
afresh.  But  it  is  not  the  religious  pastimes  of  educated  and  literature-soaked 
cliques,  still  less  is  it  the  intellect,  that  gives  rise  to  the  Second  Religiousness. 
Its  source  is  the  naive  belief  that  arises,  unremarked  but  spontaneous,  among 
the  masses  that  there  is  some  sort  of  mystic  constitution  of  actuality  (as  to 
which  formal  proofs  are  presently  regarded  as  barren  and  tiresome  word- 
jugglery),  and  an  equally  naive  heart-need  reverently  responding  to  the  myth 
with  a cult.  The  forms  of  neither  can  be  foreseen,  still  less  chosen — they 
appear  of  themselves,  and  as  far  as  we  are  ourselves  concerned,  we  are  as  yet  far 
distant  from  them.^  But  already  the  opinions  of  Comte  and  Spencer,  the 
Materialism  and  the  Monism  and  the  Darwinism,  which  stirred  the  best 
minds  of  the  nineteenth  century  to  such  passion,  have  become  the  world-view 
proper  to  country  cousins. 

The  Classical  philosophy  had  exhausted  its  ground  by  about  250  b.c.  From 
that  time  on,  “knowledge”  was  no  longer  a continually  tested  and  augmented 
stock,  but  a belief  therein,  due  basically  to  force  of  habit,  but  still  able  to 
convince,  thanks  to  an  old  and  well-tried  methodology.  In  the  time  of  Socrates 

^ It  is  perhaps  possible  for  us  to  make  some  guess  already  as  to  these  forms,  which  (it  is  self- 
evident)  must  lead  back  to  certain  elements  of  Gothic  Christianity.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  what  is 
quite  certain  is  that  they  will  not  be  the  product  of  any  literary  taste  for  Late-Indian  or  Late-Chinese 
speculation,  but  something  of  the  type,  for  example,  of  Adventism  and  suchlike  sects. 


311^:'  . THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

there  had  been  Rationalism  as  the  religion  of  educated  men,  with,  above  it, 
the  scholar-philosophy  and,  below  it,  the  ‘‘superstition*'  of  the  masses.  Now, 
philosophy  developed  towards  an  intellectual,  and  the  popular  syncretism 
towards  a tangible,  religiousness.  The  tendency  was  the  same  in  both,  and 
myth-belief  and  piety  spread,  not  downwards,  but  upwards.  Philosophy  had 
much  to  receive  and  little  to  give.  The  Stoa  had  begun  in  the  materialism 
of  the  Sophists  and  Cynics,  and  had  explained  the  whole  mythology  on  al- 
legorical lines,  but  the  prayer  to  Zeus  at  table  — one  of  the  most  beautiful 
relics  of  the  Classical  Second  Religiousness  ^ — dates  from  as  early  as  Cleanthes 
(d.  13^),  In  Sulla's  time  there  was  an  upper-class  Stoicism  that  was  religious 
through  and  through,  and  a popular  syncretism  which  combined  Phrygian, 
Syrian,  and  Egyptian  cults  with  numberless  Classical  mysteries  that  had  be- 
come almost  forgotten  — corresponding  exactly  to  the  development  of  Buddha's 
enlightened  wisdom  into  Hinayana  for  the  learned  and  Mahay  ana  for  the 
masses,  and  to  the  relation  between  learned  Confucianism  and  Taoism  as  the 
vessel  of  Chinese  syncretism  which  it  soon  became. 

Contemporary  with  the  “Positivist”  Meng-tse  (371-189)  there  suddenly 
began  a powerful  movement  towards  alchemy,  astrology,  and  occultism.  It 
has  long  been  a favourite  topic  of  dispute  whether  this  was  something  new  or  a 
recrudescence  of  old  Chinese  myth-feeling  — but  a glance  at  Hellenism  supplies 
the  answer.  This  syncretism  appears  “simultaneously”  in  the  Classical,  in 
India  and  China,  and  in  popular  Islam.  It  starts  always  on  rationalist  doctrines 
— the  Stoa,  Lao-tse,  Buddha  — and  carries  these  through  with  peasant  and 
springtime  and  exotic  motives  of  every  conceivable  sort.  From  about  100  b.c. 
the  Classical  Syncretism  — which  must  not  be  confused  with  that  of  the  later 
Magian  Pseudomorphosis  ^ — raked  in  motives  from  Orphism,  from  Egypt, 
from  Syria;  from  67  b.c.  the  Chinese  brought  in  Indian  Buddhism  in  the  popular 
Mahayana  form,  and  the  potency  of  the  holy  writings  as  charms,  and  the 
Buddha-figures  as  fetishes,  was  thought  to  be  all  the  greater  for  their  alien 
origin.  The  original  doctrine  of  Lao-tse  disappeared  very  quickly.  At  the 
beginning  of  Han  times  (r.  a.d.  zoo)  the  troops  of  the  Sen  had  ceased  to  be 
“moral  representations”  and  become  kindly  beings.  The  wind-,  cloud-,  thun- 
der-, and  rain-gods  came  back.  Crowds  of  cults  which  purported  to  drive  out 
the  evil  spirits  by  the  aid  of  the  gods  acquired  a footing.  It  was  in  that  time 
that  there  arose  — doubtless  out  of  some  basic  principle  of  pre-Confucian  philos- 
ophy— the  myth  of  Pan-ku,  the  prime  principle  from  which  the  series  of 
mythical  emperors  descended.  As  we  know,  the  Logos-idea  followed  a similar 
line  of  development.^ 

^ KxniTsx,  Stoic,  vet.  fragm., 

^ See  p.  ioz. 

® The  Lii-shi  Chun-tsiu  of  Lii-pu-Wei  (d.  Z37  b.c.,  Chinese  Augustan  Age)  is  the  first  monu- 
ment of  this  syncretism,  of  which  the  final  deposit  was  the  ritual  work  Li-ki  of  the  Han  period  (B. 
SdamdXtty  Das  ^riestcrtumim  altm  China 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  313 

The  theory  and  practice  of  the  conduct  of  life  that  Buddha  taught  were 
the  outcome  of  world-weariness  and  intellectual  disgusts,  and  were  wholly 
unrelated  to  religious  questions.  And  yet  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  Indian 
“Imperiar’  period  (z^o  b.c.)  he  himself  had  already  become  a seated  god-figure; 
and  the  Nirvana-theories,  comprehensible  only  to  the  learned,  were  giving 
place  more  and  more  to  solid  and  tangible  doctrines  of  heaven,  hell,  and  salva- 
tion, which  were  probably  borrowed,  as  in  other  syncretisms,  from  an  alien 
source  — namely,  Persian  Apocalyptic.  Already  in  Asoka’s  time  there  were 
eighteen  Buddhist  sects.  The  salvation-doctrine  of  Mahay  ana  found  its  first 
great  herald  in  the  poet-scholar  Asvagosha  (r.  50  b.c.)  and  its  fulfilment  proper  in 
Nagarjuna  (r.  a.d.  150).  But  side  by  side  with  such  teaching,  the  whole  mass 
of  proto-Indian  mythology  came  back  into  circulation.  The  Vishnu-  and 
Shiva-religions  were  already  in  300  b.c.  in  definite  shape,  and,  moreover,  in 
syncretic  form,  so  that  the  Krishna  and  the  Rama  legends  were  now  transferred 
to  Vishnu.  We  have  the  same  spectacle  in  the  Egyptian  New  Empire,  where 
Amen  of  Thebes  formed  the  centre  of  a vast  syncretism,  and  again  in  the  Arabian 
world  of  the  Abbassids,  where  the  folk-religion,  with  its  images  of  Purgatory, 
Hell,  Last  Judgment,  the  heavenly  Kaaba,  Logos-Mohammed,  fairies,  saints, 
and  spooks  drove  pristine  Islam  entirely  into  the  background.^ 

There  are  still  in  such  times  a few  high  intellects  like  Nero’s  tutor  Seneca 
and  his  antitype  Psellus  ^ the  philosopher,  royal  tutor  and  politician  of  By- 
zantium’s Cassarism-phase;  like  Marcus  Aurelius  the  Stoic  and  Asoka  the 
Buddhist,  who  were  themselves  the  Caesars;  ^ like  the  Pharaoh  Amenhotep  IV 
(Akhenaton),  whose  deeply  significant  experiment  was  treated  as  heresy  and 
brought  to  naught  by  the  powerful  Amen-priesthood  — a risk  that  Asoka,  too, 
had,  no  doubt,  to  face  from  the  Brahmins. 

But  Cassarism  itself,  in  the  Chinese  as  in  the  Roman  Empire,  gave  birth  to 
an  emperor-cult,  and  thereby  concentrated  Syncretism.  It  is  an  absurd  notion 
that  the  veneration  of  the  Chinese  for  the  living  emperor  is  a relic  of  ancient 
religion.  During  the  whole  course  of  the  Chinese  Culture  there  were  no  em- 
perors at  all.  The  rulers  of  the  States  were  called  Wang  (that  is,  kings),  and 
scarcely  a century  before  the  final  victory  of  the  Chinese  Augustus  Meng-tse 
wrote  — in  the  vein  of  our  nineteenth  century  — *‘The  people  is  the  most  im- 
portant element  in  the  country;  next  come  the  useful  gods  of  the  soil  and  the 
crops,  and  least  in  importance  comes  the  ruler.”  The  mythology  of  the  pristine 
emperors  was  without  doubt  put  together  by  Confucius  and  his  contemporaries, 

^ M.  Horten,  Die  religiose  Gedanhnwslt  des  Volhes  im  hmtigen  Islam  C1917). 

^ 1018-78;  c£.  Dieterich,  Byzant.  Charaherkoffe  (1909),  p.  63.  [Or  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.,  article 
‘‘Psellus.”  — Tr.] 

® It  was  only  in  old  age  and  after  long  and  heavy  warring  that  both  these  Cxsars  gave  themselves 
up  to  a mild  and  weary  piety,  and  both  of  them  held  aloof  from  the  more  definite  religions.  From 
the  point  of  view  of  dogma,  Asoka  was  no  Buddhist;  what  he  did  was  to  understand  the  currents 
and  take  them  under  his  protection  (Hillebraadt,  Altindien,  p.  143).  [Asoka’s  life  is  dealt  with  in 
several  of  the  works  of  Rhys  Davids;  for  example,  Ch.  xv  of  his  Buddhist  India.  — - Tr.] 


3X4  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

its  constitutional  and  social-ethical  form  was  dictated  hj  their  rationalist  aims, 
and  from  this  myth  the  first  Chinese  C^sar  borrowed  both  title  and  cult-idea. 
The  elevation  of  men  to  divinity  is  the  full-cycle  return  to  the  springtime  in 
which  gods  were  converted  into  heroes  — exactly  like  these  very  emperors  and 
the  figures  of  Homer  — and  it  is  a distinguishing  trait  of  almost  all  religions 
of  this  second  degree.  Confucius  himself  was  deified  in  a.o.  57,  with  an  ofiieiai 
cult,  and  Buddha  had  been  so  long  before.  A1  Ghazali  (r.  1050),  who  helped 
to  bring  about  the  **  Second  Religiousness”  of  the  Islamic  world,  is  now,  in  the 
popular  belief,  a divine  being  and  is  beloved  as  a saint  and  helper.  In  the  philos- 
ophy-schools of  the  Classical  there  was  a cult  of  Plato,  and  of  Epicurus,  and 
Alexander’s  claim  to  descent  from  Heracles  and  Caesar’s  to  descent  from  Venus 
lead  directly  to  the  cult  of  the  Divus,  in  which  immemorial  Orphic  imaginings 
and  family  religions  crop  up  afresh,  just  as  the  cult  of  Hwang-ti  contains  traits 
of  the  most  ancient  mythology  of  China. 

But  with  the  coming  of  the  emperor-cults  there  begins  at  once,  in  each  of  the 
two,  an  attempt  to  bring  the  Second  Religiousness  into  fixed  organiziations, 
which,  however  named  — sects,  orders.  Churches  — are  always  stiff  re-construc- 
tions of  what  had  been  living  forms  of  the  Springtime,  and  bear  the  same  re- 
lation to  these  as  ” caste”  bears  to  “status.” 

There  are  signs  of  the  tendency  even  in  the  Augustan  reforms,  with  their 
artificial  revival  of  long-dead  city-cults,  such  as  the  rites  of  the  Fratres  Arvales, 
but  it  is  only  with  the  Hellenistic  mystery-religions,  or  even  with  Mithraism,^ 
that  community  or  Church  organi2:ation  proper  begins,  and  its  development  is 
broken  off  in  the  ensuing  downfall  of  the  Classical.  The  corresponding  feature 
in  Egypt  is  the  theocratic  state  set  up  by  the  priest-kings  of  Thebes  in  the 
eleventh  century.  The  Chinese  analogue  is  the  Tao  churches  of  the  Han 
period  and  especially  that  founded  by  Chang-lu,  which  gave  rise  to  the  fearful 
insurrection  of  the  Yellow  Turbans  (recalling  the  religious  provincial  rebellions 
of  the  Roman  Empire),  which  devastated  whole  regions  and  brought  about  the 
fall  of  the  Han  dynasty.^  And  the  very  counterpart  of  these  ascetic  Churches 
of  Taoism,  with  their  rigidity  and  wild  mythology,  is  to  be  found  in  the  late 
Byzantine  monk-states  such  as  Studion  and  the  autonomous  group  of  monas- 
teries on  Athos,  founded  in  1100,  which  are  as  suggestive  of  Buddhism  as  any- 
thing could  well  be. 

In  the  end  Second  Religiousness  issues  in  tht  fellah-reUgions . Here  the  oppo- 
sition between  cosmopolitan  and  provincial  piety  has  vanished  again,  as  com- 
pletely as  that  between  primitive  and  higher  Culture.  What  this  means  the 
conception  of  the  fellah  people,  discussed  in  an  earlier  chapter,^  tells  us.  Re- 
ligion becomes  entirely  historyless;  where  formerly  decades  constituted  an 

^ In  so  far  as  it  is  permissible  to  reckon  Mithraism  as  Classical  at  all  — for  it  is  really  a religion 
of  the  Magian  Spring. 

® De  Groot,  TJniversismus  (1918),  p.  134. 

* P,  169. 


■ PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  .315 

epoch,  Gow  whole  centuries  pass  unimportantly,  and  the  ups  and  downs  of 
superficial  changes  only  serve  to  show  the  unalterable  finality  of  the  inner  state. 
It  matters  nothing  that  “Chufucianism’’  appeared  in  China  (1100)  as  a variant 
of  the  Confucian  state-doctrine,  when  it  appeared,  and  whether  or  not  it  sue- 
ceded.  Equally,  it  signifies  nothing  that  Indian  Buddhism,  long  become  a 
polytheistic  religion  of  the  people,  went  down  before  Neo-Brahmanism  (whose 
great  divine,  Sankhara,  lived  about  800),  nor  is  it  of  importance  to  know  the 
date  at  which  the  latter  passed  over  into  the  Hinduism  of  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
and  Shiva.  There  always  are  and  always  will  be  a handful  of  superlatively 
intellectual,  thoughtful,  and  perfectly  self-sufficing  people,  like  the  Brahmins 
in  India,  the  Mandarins  in  China,  and  the  Egyptian  priests  who  amazed  Herodo- 
tus. But  the  fellah-religion  itself  is  once  more  primitive  through  and  through 
— the  animal-cults  of  the  Egyptian  XXVIth  dynasty;  the  composite  of  Bud- 
dhism, Confucianism,  and  Taoism  that  constitutes  the  state  religion  of  China; 
the  Islam  of  the  present-day  East.  The  religion  of  the  Aztecs  was  very  likely 
another  case  in  point,  for,  as  Cortez  found  it,  it  seems  remote  indeed  from  the 
intensely  intellectualized  religion  of  the  Mayas. 

VII 

The  religion  of  Jewry,  too,  is  a fellah-religion  since  the  time  of  Jehuda  ben 
Halevi  who  (like  his  Islamic  teacher,  A1  Ghazali)  regarded  scientific  philos- 
ophy with  an  unqualified  scepticism,  and  in  the  (1140)  refused  to  it  any 

r61e  save  that  of  handmaid  of  the  orthodox  theology.  This  corresponds  exactly 
to  the  transition  from  Middle  Stoicism  to  the  later  form  of  the  Imperial  period, 
and  to  the  extinction  of  Chinese  speculation  under  the  Western  Han  Dynasty. 
Still  more  significant  is  the  figure  of  Moses  Maimonides,^  who  in  1175  collected 
the  entire  dogmatic  material  of  Judaism,  as  something  fixed  and  complete,  in  a 
great  work  of  the  type  of  the  Chinese  Li-ki^  entirely  regardless  of  whether  the 
particular  items  still  retained  any  meaning  or  not.^  Neither  in  this  period  nor 
in  any  other  is  Judaism  unique  in  religious  history,  though  from  the  view-point 
that  the  Western  Culture  has  taken  up  on  its  own  ground,  it  may  seem  so. 
Nor  is  it  peculiar  to  Jewry  that,  unperceived  by  those  who  bear  it,  its  name  is 
for  ever  changing  in  meaning,  for  the  same  has  happened,  step  by  step,  in  the 
Persian  story. 

In  their  ** Merovingian**  period  — approximately  the  last  five  centuries 
before  the  birth  of  Christ  — both  Jewry  and  Persia  evolve  from  tribal  groups 
into  nations  of  Magian  cast,  without  land,  without  unity  of  origin,  and  (even 
so  soon)  with  the  characteristic  ghetto  mode  of  life  that  endures  unchanged  to- 
day for  the  Jews  of  Brooklyn  and  the  Parsecs  of  Bombay  alike. 

^ Sec  the  article  ‘‘Maimonidcs’"  in  Bwy.  Brif.,  XI  cd.  — Tr. 

® Fromer,  Talmud^  p.  zi/.  The  “red  cow“  and  the  ritual  of  anointing  a Jewish  king  were 
treated  in  this  work  with  the  same  seriousness  as  the  most  important  provisions  of  private  law. 
[Sec  J.  and  J.  Tharaud,  01.1,  (1917).  — Tr.] 


3i6  THE  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

In  the  Springtime  (first  five  centuries  of  the  Christian  era)  this  landless 
Consensus  spread  geographically  from  Spain  to  Shantung.  This  was  the 
Jewish  Age  of  Chivalry  and  its  “Gothic''  blossoming-time  of  religious  creative- 
force.  The  later  Apocalyptic,  the  Mishnah,  and  also  primitive  Christianity 
(which  was  not  cast  off  till  after  Trajan’s  and  Hadrian's  time)  are  creations  of 
this  nation.  It  is  well  known  that  in  those  days  the  Jews  were  peasants, 
artisans,  and  dwellers  in  little  towns,  and  ‘'big  business"  was  in  the  hands  of 
Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Romans  — that  is,  members  of  the  Classical  world. 

About  500  ^ begins  the  Jewish  Baroque,  which  Western  observers  are  ac- 
customed to  regard,  very  one-sidedly,  as  part  of  the  picture  of  Spain's  age  of 
glory.  The  Jewish  Consensus,  like  the  Persian,  Islamic,  and  Byzantine,  now 
advances  to  an  urban  and  intellectual  awareness,  and  thenceforward  it  is  master 
of  the  forms  of  city-economics  and  city-science.  Tarragona,  Toledo,  and 
Granada  are  predominantly  Jewish  cities.  Jews  constitute  an  essential  element 
in  Moorish  high  society.  Their  finished  forms,  their  their  knightliness, 

amazed  the  Gothic  nobility  of  the  Crusades,  which  tried  to  imitate  them;  but 
the  diplomacy  also,  and  the  war-management  and  the  administration  of  the 
Moorish  cities  would  all  have  been  unthinkable  without  the  Jewish  aristocracy, 
which  was  every  whit  as  thoroughbred  as  the  Islamic.  As  once  in  Arabia  there 
had  been  a Jewish  Mmmsang,  so  now  here  there  was  a high  literature  of  en- 
lightened science.  It  was  under  the  guidance  of  the  Rabbi  Isaac  Hassan,  and  by 
the  hand  of  Jewish  and  Islamic  as  well  as  Christian  savants,  that  Alfonso  X's 
new  work  on  the  planets  was  prepared  (c.  1x50);  ^ in  other  words,  it  was  an 
achievement  of  Magian  and  not  of  Faustian  world-thought.^  But  Spain  and 
Morocco  after  all  contained  but  a very  small  fraction  of  the  Jewish  Consensus, 
and  even  this  Consensus  itself  had  not  merely  a worldly  but  also  (and  predomi- 
nantly)  a spiritual  significance.  In  it,  too,  there  occurred  a Puritan  movement, 
which  rejected  the  Talmud  and  tried  to  get  back  to  the  pure  Torah.  The  com- 
munity of  the  Qaraites,  preceded  by  many  a forerunner,  arose  about  y6o  in 
northern  Syria,  the  selfsame  area  which  gave  birth  a century  earlier  to  the 
Paulician  iconoclasts  and  a century  later  to  the  Sufism  of  Islam  — three  Magian 
tendencies  whose  inner  relationship  is  unmistakable.  The  Qaraites,  like  the 
Puritans  of  all  other  Cultures,  were  combated  by  both  orthodoxy  and  enlight- 
enment. Rabbinical  counterblasts  appeared  from  Cordova  and  Fez  to  southern 
Arabia  and  Persia.  But  in  that  period  appeared  also  — an  outcome  of  “Jewish 
Sufism,"  and  suggestive  in  places  of  Swedenborg  — the  chef-d’muvre  of  rational 
mysticism,  the  Yesirah,  germane  in  its  Kabbalistic  root-ideas  to  Byzantine 
image-symbolism  and  the  contemporary  magic  of  Greek  “second-degree 
Christianity,"  and  equally  so  to  the  folfereligion  of  Islam. 

^ See,  for  the  following  paragraphs,  the  articles  Jews,'*  ^‘Hebrew  Religion,**  ‘‘Hebrew  Lit- 
erature,” “Kabbalah,”  “Qaraites,”  etc.,  in  Brit,,  XI  cd.  — Tr. 

* Strunz,  Gesch.  der  Naturwiss.  im  24ittelalter, 

3 Only  with  Nicolaus  Cusanus  was  this  state  of  things  reversed. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  ■ 317 

But  an  entirely  new  situation  was  created  when,  from  about  the  year  1000, 
the  Western  portion  of  the  Consensus  found  itself  suddenly  in  the  field  of  the 
young  Western  Culture.  The  Jews,  like  the  Parsees,  the  Byzantines,  and  the 
Moslenis,  had  become  by  then  civilized  and  cosmopolitan,  whereas  the  German- 
Roman  world  lived  in  the  townless  land,  and  the  settlements  that  had  just  come 
(or  were  coming)  into  existence  around  monasteries  and  market-places  were  still 
many  generations  short  of  possessing  souls  of  their  own.  While  the  Jews  were 
already  almost  fellaheen,  the  Western  peoples  were  still  almost  primitives. 
The  Jew  could  not  comprehend  the  Gothic  inwardness,  the  castle,  the  Cathedral; 
nor  the  Christian  the  Jew’s  superior,  almost  cynical,  intelligence  and  his  finished 
expertness  in  “ money-thinking.  ’ ’ There  was  mutual  hate  and  contempt,  due  not 
to  race-distinction,  but  to  difference  of  -phase.  Into  all  the  hamlets  and  country 
towns  the  Jewish  Consensus  built  its  essentially  megalopolitan  — proletarian 
— • ghettos.  The  Judengasse  is  a thousand  years  in  advance  of  the  Gothic  town. 
Just  so,  in  Jesus’s  days,  the  Roman  towns  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  villages  on 
the  Lake  of  Genesareth. 

But  these  young  nations  were,  besides,  bound  up  with  the  soil  and  the  idea 
of  a fatherland,  and  the  landless  ‘“Consensus,”  which  was  cemented,  not  by 
deliberate  organization,  but  by  a wholly  unconscious,  wholly  metaphysical 
impulse  — an  expression  of  the  Magian  world-feeling  in  its  simplest  and  directest 
form  ~ appeared  to  them  as  something  uncanny  and  incomprehensible.  It  was 
in  this  period  that  the  legend  of  the  Wandering  Jew  arose.  It  meant  a good  deal 
for  a Scottish  monk  to  visit  a Lombard  monastery,  and  nostalgia  soon  took 
him  home  again,  but  when  a rabbi  of  Mainz  — in  1000  the  seat  of  the  most 
important  Talmudic  seminary  of  the  West  — or  of  Salerno  betook  himself 
to  Cairo  or  Merv  or  Basra,  he  was  at  home  in  every  ghetto.  In  this  tacit  cohesion 
lay  the  very  idea  of  the  Magian  nation^—-*  although  the  contemporary  West 
was  unaware  of  the  fact,  it  was  for  the  Jews,  as  for  the  Greeks  of  the  period 
and  the  Parsees  and  Islam,  State  and  Church  and  people  all  in  one.  This  State 
had  its  own  jurisprudence  and  (what  Christians  never  perceived)  its  own 
public  life,®  and  despised  the  surrounding  world  of  the  host-peoples  as  a sort 
of  outland;  and  it  was  a veritable  treason-trial  that  expelled  Spinoza  and 
Uriel  Acosta  — an  event  of  which  these  host-peoples  could  not  possibly  grasp 
the  under  meaning.  And  in  1799  the  leading  thinker  among  the  Eastern  Hasi- 
dim.  Senior  Salman,  was  handed  over  by  the  rabbinical  opposition  to  the 
Petersburg  Government  as  though  to  a foreign  state. 

Jewry  of  the  West-European  group  had  entirely  lost  the  relation  to  the  open 
land  which  had  still  existed  in  the  Moorish  period  of  Spain.  There  were  no 
more  peasants.  The  smallest  ghetto  was  a fragment,  however  miserable,  of 

ip.  174. 

® The  reader  is  recommended  to  study,  in  the  light  of  ail  this,  recent  literature  of  the  type  ol 
Hajim  Bloch’s  Golem  and  the  works  of  the  brothers  Tharaud.  — Tr. 


DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST' 

megalopolis,  and  its  inhabitants  (like  those  of  hardened  India  and  China)  split 
into  castes  — the  Rabbi  is  the  Brahmin  or  Mandarin  of  the  ghetto  — and  a 
coolie-mass  characterized  by  civilized,  cold,  superior  intelligence  and  an  un- 
deviating eye  to  business.  But  this  phenomenon,  again,  is  not  unique  if  our 
historical  sense  takes  in  the  wider  horizon,  for  all  Magian  nations  have  been  in 
this  condition  since  the  Crusade  period.  The  Parsee  in  India  possesses  exactly 
the  same  business-power  as  the  Jews  in  the  European- American  world  and  the 
Armenians  and  Greeks  in  southern  Europe.  The  same  phenomenon  occurs  in 
every  other  Civilization,  when  it  pushes  into  a younger  milieu  — witness  the 
Chinese  in  California  (where  they  are  the  targets  of  a true  Anti-Semitism  of 
western  America),  in  Java,  and  in  Singapore;  that  of  the  Indian  trader  in 
East  Africa;  and  that  of  the  Romans  in  the  Early  Arabian  World.  In  the  last 
instance,  indeed,  the  conditions  were  the  exact  reverse  of  those  of  to-day,  for 
the  “Jews” of  those  days  were  the  Romans,  and  the  Aramaean  felt  for  them  an 
apocalyptic  hatred  that  is  very  closely  akin  to  our  West-European  Anti-Semi- 
tism. The  outbreak  of  88,  in  which,  at  a sign  from  Mithridates,  a hundred 
thousand  Roman  business-people  were  murdered  by  the  exasperated  population 
of  Asia  Minor,  was  a veritable  pogrom. 

Over  and  above  these  oppositions  there  was  that  of  race,  which  passed 
from  contempt  into  hate  in  proportion  as  the  Western  Culture  itself  caught  up 
with  the  Civilization  and  the  “difference  of  age,”  expressed  in  the  way  of 
life  and  the  increasing  primacy  of  intelligence,  became  smaller.  But  all  this 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  silly  catchwords  “Aryan”  and  “Semite”  that  have 
been  borrowed  from  philology.  The  “ Aryan”  Persians  and  Armenians  are  in 
our  eyes  entirely  indistinguishable  from  the  Jews,  and  even  in  South  Europe 
and  the  Balkans  there  is  almost  no  bodily  difference  between  the  Christian  and 
Jewish  inhabitants.  The  Jewish  nation  is,  like  every  other  nation  of  the 
Arabian  Culture,  the  result  of  an  immense  mission,  and  up  to  well  within  the 
Crusades  it  was  changed  and  changed  again  by  accessions  and  secessions 
massed  One  part  of  Eastern  Jewry  conforms  in  bodily  respects  to  the  Christian 
inhabitants  of  the  Caucasus,  another  to  the  South-Russian  Tatars,  and  a large 
portion  of  Western  Jewry  to  the  North  African  Moors.  What  has  mattered  in 
the  West  more  than  any  other  distinction  is  the  difference  between  the  race-ideal' of : 
the  Gothic  springtime,^  which  has  bred  its  human  type,  and  that  of  the  Sephardic 
Jew,  which  first  formed  itself  in  the  ghettos  of  the  West  and  was  likewise  the 
product  of  a particular  spiritual  breeding  and  training  under  exceedingly  hard 
external  conditions  — to  which,  doubtless,  we  must  add  the  effectual  spell  of 
the  land  and  people  about  him,  and  his  metaphysical  defensive  reaction  to  that 
spell,  especially  after  the  loss  of  the  Arabic  language  had  made  this  part  of  the 
nation  a self-contained  world.  This  feeling  of  being  “ different”  is  the  more 
potent  on  both  sides,  the  more  breed  the  individual  possesses.  It  is  want  of  race, 

^ See  pp.  2.59,  ct  seq.;  174,  ct  scq.  ® P.  1x7. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  319 

aad  aothing  else,  that  makes  intellectuals  — philosophers,  doettinaifess 
Utopists  — incapable  of  understanding  the  depth  of  this  metaphysical  hatreds 
which  is  the  beat-difference  of  two  currents  of  being  manifested  as  an  unbearable 
dissonance,  a hatred  that  may  become  tragic  for  both,  the  same  hatred  as  has 
dominated  the  Indian  Culture  in  setting  the  Indian  of  race  against  the  Sudra. 
During  the  Gothic  age  this  difference  is  deep  and  religious,  and  the  object  of 
hatred  is  the  Consensus  as  religion;  only  with  the  beginning  of  the  Western 
Civilmation  does  it  become  materialist,  and  begin  to  attack  Jewry  on  its  in- 
tellectual and  business  sides,  on  which  the  West  suddenly  finds  itself  confronted 
by  an  even  challenger. 

But  the  deepest  element  of  separation  and  bitterness  has  been  one  of  which 
the  full  tragedy  has  been  least  understood.  While  Western  man,  from  the  days 
of  the  Saxon  emperors  to  the  present,  has  (in  the  most  significant  sense  of  the 
words)  lived  his  history,  and  lived  it  with  a consciousness  of  it  that  no  other 
Culture  can  parallel,  the  Jewish  Consensus  ceased  to  have  a history  at  alL^ 
Its  problems  were  solved,  its  inner  form  was  complete,  conclusive,  and  un- 
alterable. For  it,  as  for  Islam,  the  Greek  Church,  and  the  Parsees,  centuries 
ceased  to  mean  anything,  and  consequently  no  one  belonging  inwardly  to  the 
Consensus  can  even  begin  to  comprehend  the  passion  with  which  Faustians 
livingly  experience  the  short  crowded  epochs  in  which  their  history  and  destiny 
take  decisive  turns  — the  beginning  of  the  Crusades,  the  Reformation,  the 
French  Revolution,  the  German  Wars  of  Liberation,  and  each  and  every  turn- 
ing-point in  the  existence  of  the  several  peoples.  All  this,  for  the  Jew,  lies 
thirty  generations  back.  Outside  him  history  on  the  grand  style  flowed  on  and 
past.  Epochs  succeeded  to  epochs,  every  century  witnessed  fundamental  human 
changes,  but  in  the  ghetto  and  in  the  souls  of  its  denizens  all  stood  still.  And 
even  when  he  regarded  himself  as  a member  of  the  people  amongst  whom  he 
sojourned  and  took  part  in  their  good  and  evil  fortune  — as  happened  in  so 
many  countries  in  1914  — he  lived  these  experiences,  not  really  as  something  Ms 
owfiy  but  as  a partisan,  a supporter;  he  judged  them  as  an  interested  spectator, 
and  hence  it  is  just  the  deepest  meanings  of  the  struggle  that  must  ever  remain 
hidden  from  him.  A Jewish  cavalry-general  fought  in  the  Thirty  Years’  War 
(he  lies  buried  in  the  old  Jewish  cemetery  at  Prague^)  — but  what  did  the  ideas 
of  Luther  or  Loyola  mean  to  him?  What  did  the  Byzantines  — near  relatives 
of  the  Jews  — comprehend  of  the  Crusades?  Such  things  are  among  the  tragic 
necessities  of  the  higher  history  that  consists  in  the  life-courses  of  individual 
Cultures,  and  often  have  they  repeated  themselves.  The  Romans,  then  an 
ageing  people,  cannot  possibly  have  understood  what  was  at  issue  for  the  Jews 
in  the  trial  of  Jesus  or  the  rising  of  Barcochebas.^  The  European- American 

ip.  48. 

2 Prague  contaios  a veritable  corpus  of  commentary  upon  these  pages.  — Tr, 

® A.D.  132..  See  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.,  VoL  XV,  p.  402.,  and  VoL  III,  p.  395.  — Tr, 


3ZO  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

world  has  displayed  a complete  incomprehension  of  the  fellah-revointions 
of  Turkey  (1908)  and  China  (1911);  the  inner  life  and  thought  of  these  peoples, 
and  consequently,  even  their  notions  of  state  and  sovereignty  (the  Caliph  in 
the  one,  the  Son  of  Heaven  in  the  other)  being  of  an  utterly  different  cast  and, 
therefore,  a sealed  book,  the  course  of  events  could  neither  be  weighed  up, 
nor  even  reckoned  upon  in  advance.  The  member  of  an  alien  Culture  can  be  a 
spectator,  and  therefore  also  a descriptive  historian  of  the  past,  but  he  can  never 
be  a statesman,  a man  who  feels  the  future  working  in  him.  If  he  does  not 
possess  the  material  power  to  enable  him  to  act  in  the  cadre  of  his  own  Culture, 
ignoring  or  manipulating  those  of  the  alien  (which,  of  course,  may  occur, 
as  with  the  Romans  in  the  young  East  or  Disraeli  in  England),  he  stands  helpless 
in  the  midst  of  events.  The  Roman  and  the  Greek  always  mentally  projected 
the  life-conditions  of  his  Polis  into  the  alien  event;  the  modern  European 
always  regards  alien  Destinies  in  terms  of  constitution,  parliament,  and  democ- 
racy, although  the  application  of  such  ideas  to  other  Cultures  is  ridiculous 
and  meaningless;  and  the  Jew  of  the  Consensus  follows  the  history  of  the 
present  (which  is  nothing  but  that  of  the  Faustian  Civilization  spread  over 
continents  and  oceans)  with  the  fundamental  feelings  of  Magian  mankind, 
even  when  he  himself  is  firmly  convinced  of  the  Western  character  of 
his  thought. 

As  every  Magian  Consensus  is  non-territorial  and  geographically  unlim- 
ited, it  involuntarily  sees  in  all  conflicts  concerning  the  Faustian  ideas  of 
fatherland,  mother  tongue,  ruling  house,  monarchy,  constitution,  a return 
from  forms  that  are  thoroughly  alien  (therefore  burdensome  and  meaningless) 
to.  him  towards  forms  matching  with  his  own  nature.  Hence  the  word  “ in- 
ternational,'V  whether  it  be  coupled  with  socialism,  pacificism,  or  capitalism, 
can  excite  him  to  enthusiasm,  but  what  he  hears  in  that  word  is  the  essence  of 
his  landless  and  boundless  Consensus.  While  for  the  European- American  de- 
mocracy constitutional  struggles  and  revolutions  mean  an  evolution  towards 
the  Civilized  ideal,  for  him  they  mean  (as  he  almost  never  consciously  realizes) 
the  breaking-down  of  all  that  is  of  other  build  than  himself.  Even  when  the 
force  of  the  Consensus  in  him  is  broken  and  the  life  of  his  host-people  exercises 
an  outward  attraction  upon  him  to  the  point  of  an  induced  patriotism,  yet  the 
party  that  he  supports  is  always  that  of  which  the  aims  are  most  nearly  com- 
parable with  the  Magian  essence.  Hence  in  Germany  he  is  a democrat  and  in 
England  (like  the  Parsee  in  India)  an  imperialist.  It  is  exactly  the  same  mis- 
understanding as  when  West  Europeans  regard  Young  Turks  and  Chinese  re- 
formers as  kindred  spirits-^that  is,  as  "‘constitutionalists.’’  If  there  is 
inward  relationship,  a man  affirms  even  where  he  destroys;  if  inward  alienness, 
his  effect  is  negative  even  where  his  desire  is  to  be  constructive.  What  the 
Western  Culture  has  destroyed,  by  reform-efforts  of  its  own  type  where  it  has 
had  power,  hardly  bears  thinking  of;  and  Jewry  has  been  equally  destructive 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  311. 

where  it  has  mtervened.  The  sense  of  the  inevitablcness  of  this  reciprocal 
inisnnderstandiiig  leads  to  the  appalling  hatred  that  settles  deep  in  the  blood 
and,  fastening  npon  visible  marks  like  race,  mode  of  life,  profession,  speech, 
leads  both  sides  to  waste,  ruin,  and  bloody  excesses  wherever  these  conditions 
occur.^  . 

This  applies  also,  and  above  all,  to  the  religiousness  of  the  Faustian  world, 
which  feels  itself  to  be  threatened,  hated,  and  undermined  by  an  alien  meta- 
physic in  its  midst.  From  the  reforms  of  Hugh  of  Cluny  and  St.  Bernard  and 
the  Lateran  Council  of  1x15  to  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Puritanism  and  thence  to 
the  Age  of  Enlightenment,  what  a tide  flowed  through  our  waking-conscious- 
ness, when  for  the  Jewish  religion  history  had  long  ceased  altogether!  Within 
the  West-European  Consensus  we  see  Joseph  Qaro  in  his  Schulehan  Arukh  (15  65) 
restating  the  Maimonides  material  in  another  form,  and  this  could  equally 
well  have  been  done  in  1400  or  1800,  or  for  that  matter  not  at  all.  In  the  fixity 
of  modern  Islam,  of  Byzantine  Christianity  since  the  Crusades  (and,  equally, 
of  the  life  of  Late  China  and  of  Late  Egypt),  ail  is  formal  and  rolled  even,  not 
only  the  food-prohibitions,  the  prayer-runes,  the  phylacteries,  but  also  the 
Talmudic  casuistry,  which  is  fundamentally  the  same  as  that  applied  for  cen- 
turies to  the  Vendidad  in  Bombay  and  the  Koran  in  Cairo.  The  mysticism, 
too,  of  Jewry  (which  is  -pure  SufistTi)  has  remained,  like  that  of  Islam,  unaltered 
since  the  Crusades;  and  in  the  last  centuries  it  has  produced  three  more  saints 
in  the  sense  of  Oriental  Sufism  — though  to  recognize  them  as  such  we  have 
to  see  through  a colour-wash  of  Western  thought-forms.  Spinoza,  with  his 
thinking  in  substances  instead  of  forces  and  his  thoroughly  Magian  dualism, 
is  entirely  comparable  with  the  last  stragglers  of  Islamic  philosophy  such  as 
Murtada  and  Shirazi.  He  makes  use  of  the  notions  of  his  Western  Baroque 
armoury,  living  himself  into  mode  of  imagination  of  that  milieu  so  thoroughly 
as  to  deceive  even  himself,  but  below  the  surface  movements  of  his  soul  he 
remains  the  unchanged  descendant  of  Maimonides  and  Avicenna  and  Talmudic 
gemnetrko  ” methodology.  In  Baal  Shem,  the  founder  of  the  Hasidim 
sect  (born  in  Volhynia  about  1698),  a true  Messiah  arose.  His  wanderings 
through  the  world  of  the  Polish  ghettos  teaching  and  performing  miracles 
are  comparable  only  with  the  story  of  primitive  Christianity;^  here  was  a 
movement  that  had  its  sources  in  ancient  currents  of  Magian,  Kabbalistic 
mysticism,  that  gripped  a large  part  of  Eastern  Jewry  and  was  undoubtedly  a 
potent  fact  in  the  religious  history  of  the  Arabian  Culture;  and  yet,  running 
its  course  as  it  did  in  the  midst  of  an  alien  mankind,  it  passed  practically  un- 
noticed by  it.  The  peaceful  battle  that  Baal  Shem  waged  for  God-immanent 

^ Instances  — besides  that  of  Mithradates  and  the  Cjrprus  massacre  (p.  198)  quoted  above  — 
are  the  Sepoy  Mutiny  in  India,  the  Boxer  RebelHon  in  China,  and  the  Bolshevist  fury  of  JewSj, 
Letts,  and  other  alien  peoples  against  Tsarist  Russia. 

^ P.  LevertofF,  Die  religiose  Denkweise  der  Chassidim pp.  I^8,  et  seq.;  M.  Buber,  Die  Legendt 
des  Baalschem  (1907).  [Brief  account  in  J.  and  Tharaud,  Petise  histoire  des  Juifs,  Ch.  vii.  — Tf.] 


3XX,  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  - 

against  the  Talmudic  pharisees  of  his  time,  his  Christlikc  figure,  the  wealth 
of  legends  that  were  rapidly  woven  about  his  person  and  the  persons  of  his 
disciples  — all  this  is  of  the  pure  Magian  spirit,  and  at  bottom  as  alien  to  us  of 
the  West  as  primitive  Christianity  itself.  The  thought-processes  of  Hasidist 
writings  arc  to  non-Jews  practically  unintelligible,  and  so  also  is  the  ritual. 
In  the  excitement  of  the  service  some  fall  into  convulsions  and  others  begin  to 
dance  like  the  dervishes  of  Islam. ^ The  original  teaching  of  Baal  Shem  was 
developed  by  one  of  the  disciples  in  Zaddikism,  and  this  too,  which  was  a 
belief  in  successive  divine  embassies  of  saints  (Zaddiks),  whose  mere  proximity 
brought  salvation,  has  obvious  kinship  with  Islamic  Mahdism  and  still  more 
with  the  Shiite  doctrine  of  the  imams  in  whom  the  “Light  of  the  Prophet 
takes  up  its  abode.  Another  disciple,  Solomon  Maimon  — of  whom  a re- 
markable autobiography  exists  — stepped  from  Baal  Shem  to  Kant  (whose 
abstract  kind  of  thought  has  always  possessed  an  immense  attraction  for  Tal- 
mudic intellects).  The  third  is  Otto  Weininger,  whose  moral  dualism  is  a 
purely  Magian  conception  and  whose  death  in  a spiritual  struggle  of  essentially 
Magian  experience  is  one  of  the  noblest  spectacles  ever  presented  by  a Late 
religiousness.^  Something  of  the  sort  Russians  may  be  able  to  experience,  but 
neither  the  Classical  nor  the  Faustian  soul  is  capable  of  it. 

In  the  “Enlightenment  ” of  the  eighteenth  century  the  Western  Culture  in 
turn  becomes  megalopolitan  and  intellectual,  and  so,  suddenly,  accessible  to 
the  intelligentsia  of  the  Consensus.  And  the  latter,  thus  dumped  into  the  middle 
of  an  epoch  corresponding,  for  them,  to  the  remote  past  of  a long-expired 
Sephardic  life-current,  were  inevitably  stirred  by  echo-feelings,  but  these  echoes 
were  of  the  critical  and  negative  side  only^  and  the  tragically  unnatural  outcome 
was  that  a cohesion  already  historically  complete  and  incapable  of  organic 
progress  was  swept  into  the  big  movement  of  the  host-peoples,  which  it  shook, 
loosened,  displaced,  and  vitiated  to  its  depths.  For,  for  the  Faustian  spirit, 
the  Enlightenment  was  a step  forward  along  its  own  road  — a step  over  debris, 
no  doubt,  but  still  affirmative  at  bottom  — whereas  for  Jewry  it  was  destruc- 
tion and  nothing  else,  the  demolition  of  an  alien  structure  that  it  did  not  un- 
derstand. And  this  is  why  we  so  often  see  the  spectacle  — paralleled  by  the 
case  of  the  Parsees  in  India,  of  the  Chinese  and  Japanese  in  z Chthtim  milieu^ 
and  by  modern  Americans  in  China  — of  enlightenment,  pushed  to  the  point 
of  cynicism  and  unqualified  atheism,  opposing  an  alien  religion,  while  the 
fellah-practices  of  its  own  folk  go  on  wholly  unaffected.  There  are  Socialists 
who  superficially  — and  yet  quite  sincerely  — combat  every  sort  of  religion, 
and  yet  in  their  own  case  follow  the  food-prohibitions  and  routine  prayers 
and  phylacteries  with  an  anxious  exactitude.  More  frequent  actually  is  inward 
lapse  from  the  Consensus  qua  creed  — the  spectacle  that  is  presented  to  us  by 

^ Levertoff,  op.  cit.,  p.  136. 

® O,  Weininger,  Taschtvhuch  (1919),  above  all  pp.  19,  et  scq. 


PYTHAGORAS,  MOHAMMED,  CROMWELL  3x3 

the  Indiaii  student  who,  after  an  English  university-training  in  Locke  and  Mill, 
acquires  the  same  cynical  contempt  for  Indian  and  Western  faiths  alike  and  must 
himself  be  crushed  under  the  ruins  of  both.  Since  the  Napoleonic  era  the  old- 
civilized  Consensus  has  mingled  unwelcome  with  the  new-civilized  Western 
^‘society'*  of  the  cities  and  has  taken  their  economic  and  scientific  methods 
into  use  with  the  cool  superiority  of  age.  A few  generations  later,  the  Japanese, 
also  a very  old  intellect,  did  the  same,  and  probably  with  still  greater  success. 
Yet  another  example  is  afforded  by  the  Carthaginians,  a rear-guard  of  the  Baby- 
lonian Civilization,  who,  already  highly  developed  when  the  Classical  Culture 
was  still  in  the  Etrusco-Doric  infancy,  ended  by  surrendering  to  Late  Hellenism  ^ 
— petrified  in  an  end-state  in  all  that  concerned  religion  and  art,  but  far  superior 
to  the  Greeks  and  Romans  as  men  of  business,  and  hated  accordingly. 

To-day  this  Magian  nation,  with  its  ghetto  and  its  religion,  itself  is  in 
danger  of  disappearing  — not  because  the  metaphysics  of  the  two  Cultures 
come  closer  to  one  another  (for  that  is  impossible),  but  because  the  intellectual- 
ized  upper  stratum  of  each  side  is  ceasing  to  be  metaphysical  at  all.  It  has 
lost  every  kind  of  inward  cohesion,  and  what  remains  is  simply  a cohesion  for 
practical  questions.  The  lead  that  this  nation  has  enjoyed  from  its  long  habitua- 
tion to  thinking  in  business  terms  becomes  ever  less  and  less  (vis-h-vis  the  Ameri- 
can, it  has  already  almost  gone),  and  with  the  loss  of  it  will  go  the  last  potent 
means  of  keeping  up  a Consensus  that  has  fallen  regionally  into  parts.  In  the 
moment  when  the  civilized  methods  of  the  European-American  world-cities 
shall  have  arrived  at  full  maturity,  the  destiny  of  Jewry  — at  least  of  the  Jewry 
in  our  midst  (that  of  Russia  is  another  problem)  — will  be  accomplished. 

Islam  has  soil  under  it.  It  has  practically  absorbed  the  Persian,  Jewish, 
Nestorian,  and  Monophysite  Consensus  into  itself.^  The  relic  of  the  Byzantine 
nation,  the  modern  Greeks,  also  occupy  their  own  land.  The  relic  of  the  Par- 
sees  in  India  dwells  in  the  midst  of  the  stiffened  forms  of  a yet  older  and  more 
fellahized  Civilization  and  is  thereby  secured  in  its  footing.  But  the  West- 
European- American  part  of  the  Jewish  Consensus,  which  has  drawn  to  itself 
and  bound  to  its  destiny  most  of  the  other  parts  of  Jewry,  has  now  fallen  into 
the  machinery  of  a young  Civilization.  Detached  from  any  land-footing  since, 
centuries  ago,  it  saved  its  life  by  shutting  itself  off  in  the  ghetto,  it  is  fragmented 
and  faced  with  dissolution.  But  that  is  a Destiny,  not  in  the  Faustian  Culture, 
but  of  the  Magian. 

^ Their  ship-buiHing  was  in  Roman  times  more  Classical  than  Phoenician,  their  state  was  or- 
ganized as  a Polls,  and  their  educated  people,  like  Hannibal,  were  familiar  with  Greek. 

® Sec  p,  x6o,  er  scq. 


CHAPTER  X 


THE  STATE 
CA) 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  ESTATES  — NOBILITY 
AND  PRIESTHOOD 


CHAPTER  X 


THE  STATE 
(A) 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  ESTATES  — NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD 

A FATHOMLESS  scctet  of  the  cosmic  flowings  that  we  call  Life  is  their  separation 
into  two  sexes.  Already  in  the  earth-bound  existence-streams  of  the  plant 
world  they  are  trying  to  part  from  one  another,  as  the  symbol  of  the  flower 
tells  us  — into  a something  that  is  this  existence  and  a something  that  keeps  it 
going.  Animals  are  free,  little  worlds  in  a big  world  — the  cosmic  — closed 
off  as  microcosms  and  set  up  against  the  macrocosm.  And,  more  and  more 
decisively  as  the  animal  kingdom  unfolds  its  history,  the  dual  direction  of  dual 
being,  of  the  masculine  and  the  feminine,  manifests  itself. 

The  feminine  stands  closer  to  the  Cosmic.  It  is  rooted  deeper  in  the  earth 
and  it  is  immediately  involved  in  the  grand  cyclic  rhythms  of  Nature.  The 
masculine  is  freer,  more  animal,  more  mobile  — as  to  sensation  and  understand- 
ing as  well  as  otherwise  — more  awake  and  more  tense. 

The  male  livingly  experiences  Destiny,  and  he  comprehends  Causality,  the 
causal  logic  of  the  Become.  The  female,  on  the  contrary,  is  herselfDcstinj  and 
Time  and  the  organic  logic  of  the  Becoming,  and  for  that  very  reason  the  prin- 
ciple of  Causality  is  for  ever  alien  to  her.  Whenever  Man  has  tried  to  give 
Destiny  any  tangible  form,  he  has  felt  it  as  of  feminine  form,  and  he  has  called 
it  Moirai,  Parcas,  Norns.  The  supreme  deity  is  never  itself  Destiny,  but  always 
either  its  representative  or  its  master  — just  as  man  represents  or  controls 
woman.  Primevally,  too,  woman  is  the  secress,  and  not  because  she  knows  the 
future,  but  because  she  is  the  future.  The  priest  merely  interprets  the  oracle; 
the  woman  is  the  oracle  itself,  and  it  is  Time  that  speaks  through  her. 

^ The  man  makes  History,  the  woman  is  History.  Here,  strangely  clear  yet 
enigmatic  still,  we  have  a dual  significance  of  all  living  happenings  — on  the 
one  hand  we  sense  cosmic  flow  as  such,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  chain  and 
train  of  successive  individuals  brings  us  back  to  the  microcosms  themselves  as 
the  recipients,  containers,  and  preservers  of  the  flowing.  It  is  this  **  second” 
history  that  is  characteristically  masculine  — political,  social,  more  conscious, 
freer,  and  more  agitated  than  the  other.  It  reaches  back  deep  into  the  animal 
world,  and  receives  highest  symbolic  and  world-historical  expression  in  the 
Hfe-courses  of  the  great  Cultures.  Feminine,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  primary, 

Gf-  p.  3 and  foot-note. 


3x8  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

the  eternal,  the  maternal,  the  plantlike  (for  the  plant  ever  has  something 
female  in  it),  the  cultureless  history  of  the  generation-sequence^  mhidi  never  alters, 
but  uniformly  and  stilly  passes  through  the  being  of  all  animal  and  human 
species,  through  all  the  short-lived  individual  Cultures.  In  retrospect,  it  is 
synonymous  with  Life  itself.  This  history,  too,  is  not  without  its  battles  and 
its  tragedies.  Woman  in  childbed  wins  through  to  her  victory.  The  Aztecs 
— the  Romans  of  the  Mexican  Culture  — honoured  the  woman  in  labour  as  a 
battling  warrior,  and  if  she  died,  she  was  interred  with  the  same  formula  as 
the  fallen  hero.  Policy  for  Woman  is  eternally  the  conquest  of  the  Man, 
through  whom  she  can  become  mother  of  children,  through  whom  she  can 
become  History  and  Destiny  and  Future.  The  target  of  her  profound  shyness, 
her  tactical  finesse,  is  ever  the  father  of  her  son.  The  man,  on  the  contrary, 
whose  centre  of  gravity  lies  essentially  in  the  other  kind  of  History,  wants 
that  son  as  his  son,  as  inheritor  and  carrier  of  his  blood  and  historical  tradition. 

Here,  in  man  and  in  woman,  the  two  kinds  of  History  are  fighting  for  power. 
Woman  is  strong  and  wholly  what  she  is,  and  she  experiences  the  Man  and  the 
Sons  only  in  relation  to  herself  and  her  ordained  r61e.  In  the  masculine  being, 
on  the  contrary,  there  is  a certain  contradiction;  he  is  this  man,  and  be  is 
something  else  besides,  which  woman  neither  understands  nor  admits,  which 
she  feels  as  robbery  and  violence  upon  that  which  to  her  is  holiest.  This 
secret  and  fundamental  war  of  the  sexes  has  gone  on  ever  since  there  were 
sexes,  and  will  continue  — silent,  bitter,  unforgiving,  pitiless  — while  they 
continue.  In  it,  too,  there  are  policies,  battles,  alliances,  treaties,  treasons. 
Race-feeling  of  love  and  hate,  which  originate  in  depths  of  world-yearning  and 
primary  instincts  of  directedness,  prevail  between  the  sexes  — and  with  a still 
more  uncanny  potency  than  in  the  other  History  that  takes  place  between  man 
and  man.  There  are  love-lyrics  and  war-lyrics,  love-dances  and  weapon-dances, 
there  are  two  kinds  of  ttzgedy  — Othello  and  Macbeth,  But  nothing  in  the 
political  world  even  begins  to  compare  with  the  abysses  of  a Clytasmnestra’s  or 
a Kriemhild’s  vengeance. 

And  so  woman  despises  that  other  History  — man’s  politics  — which 
she  never  comprehends,  and  of  which  all  that  she  sees  is  that  it  takes  her  sons 
from  her.  What  for  her  is  a triumphant  battle  that  annihilates  the  victories 
of  a thousand  childbeds?  Man’s  history  sacrifices  woman’s  history  to  itself, 
and  no  doubt  there  is  a female  heroism  too,  that  proudly  brings  the  sons  to  the 
sacrifice  (Catherine  Sforza  on  the  walls  of  Imola),  but  nevertheless  there  was 
and  is  and  ever  will  be  a secret  politic  of  the  woman  — of  the  female  of  the 
animal  world  even  — that  seeks  to  draw  away  her  male  from  his  kind  of  his- 
tory and  to  weave  him  body  and  soul  into  her  own  plantlike  history  of  generic 
succession  — that  is,  into  herself.  And  yet  all  that  is  accomplished  in  the  man- 
history  is  accomplished  under  the  battle-cries  of  hearth  and  home,  wives  and 
children,  race  and  the  like,  and  its  very  object  is  the  covering  and  upholding  of 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  , 3^9  ■ 

this  history  of  birth  and  death.  The  conflict  of  man  and  man  is  ever  on  account 
of  the  blood,  of  woman.  Woman,  as  Time,  is  that  for  which  there  is  history  at  all. 

The  woman  with  race  in  her  feels  this  even  when  she  does  not  know  it. 
She  is  Destiny,  she  plays  Destiny.  The  play  begins  with  the  fight  of  men  for 
the  possession  of  her  — Helen,  and  the  tragedy  of  Carmen,  and  Catherine  II, 
and  the  story  of  Napoleon  and  Desiree  Clary,  who  in  the  end  took  Bernadotte 
over  to  the  side  of  his  enemies  — and  it  is  not  a human  play  only,  for  this  fight 
begins  down  in  the  animal  world  and  fills  the  history  of  whole  species.  And  it 
culminates  in  her  swaying,  as  mother  or  wife  or  mistress,  the  Destiny  of  em- 
pires ■ — Hallgerd  in  the  Njal  saga,  the  Frankish  queen  Brunhilde,  Marozia 
who  gave  the  Holy  See  to  men  of  her  choice.  The  man  climbs  up  in  his  history 
until  he  has  the  future  of  a country  in  his  hands  — and  then  woman  comes 
and  forces  him  to  his  knees.  Peoples  and  states  may  go  down  in  ruin  over  it, 
but  she  in  history  has  conquered.  This,  in  the  last  analysis,  is  always  the 
aim  of  political  ambition  in  a woman  of  race.^ 

Thus  history  has  two  meanings,  neither  to  be  blasphemed.  It  is  cosmic  or 
politic,  it  is  being  or  it  preserves  being.  There  are  two  sorts  of  Destiny,  two 
sorts  of  war,  two  sorts  of  tragedy  — public  and  private.  Nothing  can  eliminate 
this  duality  from  the  world.  It  is  radical,  founded  in  the  essence  of  the  animal 
that  is  both  microcosm  and  participant  in  the  cosmic.  It  appears  at  all  sig- 
nificant conjunctures  in  the  form  of  a conflict  of  duties,  which  exists  only  for 
the  man,  not  for  the  woman,  and  in  the  course  of  a higher  Culture  it  is  never 
overcome,  but  only  deepened.  There  are  public  life  and  private  life,  public 
law  and  private  law,  communal  cults  and  domestic  cults.  As  Estate,^  Being 
is  ‘Tn  form'*  for  the  one  history;  as  race,  breed,  it  is  in  flow  as  itself  the  other 
history.  This  is  the  old  German  distinction  between  the  “sword  side’*  and  the 
“spindle  side”  of  blood-relationships.  The  double  significance  of  directional 
Time  finds  its  highest  expression  in  the  ideas  of  the  State  and  the  Family. 

The  ordering  of  the  family  is  in  living  material  what  the  form  of  the  house 
is  in  dead.^  A change  in  the  structure  and  import  of  family  life,  and  the  plan 

1 And  not  until  women  cease  to  have  race  enough  to  have  or  to  want  children,  not  until  they 
cease  to  he  history,  docs  it  become  |>ossible  for  them  to  make  or  to  copy  the  history  of  men.  Com 
versely,  it  is  deeply  significant  that  we  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  thinkers,  doctrinaires,  and  humanity- 
enthusiasts  of  anti-political  tendency  “old  women.’*  Biey  wish  to  imitate  the  other  history,  the 
history  of  woman,  although  they  — cannot. 

2 No  exact  equivalent  exists  in  common  English  for  the  German  word  Stand'"  “Aristocracy” 
is  too  narrow,  as  under  most  aspects  the  clergy  and  under  some  even  the  Tiers  have  to  be  reckoned  in. 
“Class”  fails  because,  for  logical  completeness,  it  has  to  be  stretched  so  as  to  bring  in  the  qualita- 
tively unclassed  as  a distinct  category.  (A  whole  social  history  is  contained  in  the  use  of  these  and 
similar  words  at  different  periods.)  The  word  “Estate”  itself  is  used  nowadays  for  the  “masses” 
(“Fourth  Estate”  = “Proletariat”),  but  this  very  use,  by  Socialists,  is  an  assertion  that  the  masses, 
as  workers,  possess  a qualitative  peculiarity  and  condition  of  their  own,  and  the  word  thus  continues 
to  connote  ideas  of  differentiation,  specific  constitution,  and  oriented  outlook.  It  may,  therefore* 
be  employed  here  without  fear  of  misunderstanding  or  reproach  of  pedantry.  — Tr. 

® Cf.  pp.  lao.,  et  seq. 


330  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

of  the  house  changes  also.  To  the  Classical  mode  of  housing  corresponds  the 
agnate  family  of  Classical  style.  This  is  even  more  sharply  defined  in  Hellenic 
city-law  than  in  the  later  Roman. ^ It  refers  entirely  to  the  Estate  as  present 
in  a Euclidean  here-and-now,  just  as  the  Polis  is  conceived  as  an  aggregate  of 
bodies  availably  present.  Blood-relationship,  therefore,  is  neither  necessary 
nor  sufficient  for  it;  it  ceases  at  the  limit  of  f atria  fotestasy  of  the  “house.** 
The  mother  as  such  is  not  agnatically  related  to  the  offspring  of  her  own  body; 
only  in  so  far  as,  like  them,  she  is  subject  to  the  f atria  potestas  of  her  living 
husband  is  she  the  agnatic  sister  of  her  children.^  To  the  “Consensus,’*  on  the 
other  hand,  corresponds  the  Magian  cognate  family  (Hebrew,  Mishpasha'^ 
which  is  representatively  extended  by  both  the  paternal  and  the  maternal 
blood-relationships,  and  possesses  a “spirit,”  a little  consensus,  of  its  own, 
but  no  special  head.®  It  is  significant  of  the  extinction  of  the  Classical  soul  and 
the  unfolding  of  the  Magian  that  the  “Roman”  law  of  Imperial  times  gradually 
passes  from  agnatic  to  cognatio.  Justinian’s  ii8th  and  ixyth  novels  reforming 
the  law  of  inheritance  affirm  the  victory  of  the  Magian  family-idea.^ 

On  the  other  side,  we  see  masses  of  individual  beings  streaming  past,  grow- 
ing and  passing,  hut  making  history.  The  purer,  deeper,  stronger,  more  taken- 
for-granted  the  common  beat  of  these  sequent  generations  is,  the  more  blood, 
the  more  race  they  have.  Out  of  the  infinite  they  rise,  every  one  with  its  soul,^ 
bands  that  feel  themselves  in  the  common  wave-beat  of  their  being,  as  a whole 
— not  mind-communities  like  orders,  craft-guilds,  or  schools  of  learning,  which 
are  linked  by  common  truths,  but  blood-confederates  in  the  mtlec  of  fighting 
life. 

There  are  streams  of  being  which  are  “ in  form”  in  the  same  sense  in  which 
the  term  is  used  in  sports.  A field  of  steeplechasers  is  “ in  form”  when  the  legs 
swing  surely  over  the  fences,  and  the  hoofs  beat  firmly  and  rhythmically  on  the 
flat.  When  wrestlers,  fencers,  ball-players  are  “in  form,”  the  riskiest  acts 
and  moves  come  off  easily  and  naturally.  An  art-period  is  in  form  when  its 
tradition  is  second  nature,  as  counterpoint  was  to  Bach.  An  army  is  in  form 
when  it  is  like  the  army  of  Napoleon  at  Austerlitz  and  the  army  of  Moltke  at 
Sedan.  Practically  everything  that  has  been  achieved  in  world-history,  in 
war  and  in  that  continuation  of  war  by  intellectual  means  ® that  we  call  politics; 

^ Mittcis,  'Rjtkhsncht  uni  Volksrecht  (1891),  p.  63. 

2 Soiim,  InstituHomn  C1911),  p.  614.  \Ency.  Brk.y  XI  cd.,  Vol.  XXIII,  pp-  540-1.  — Tri] 

® This  principle  formed  the  basis  of  the  dynastic-idea  of  the  Arabian  world  (Ommayads,  Com- 
neni,  Sassanids),  which  is  so  hard  for  us  to  grasp.  When  a usurper  had  seized  a throne,  he  hastened 
to  marry  one  or  another  of  the  female  members  of  the  blood-community  and  so  prolonged  the  dy- 
nasty; of  law-made  succession  rights  there  was  no  question,  nor  under  this  idea  could  there  be.  (Sec 
also  J.  Wellhauscn,  Ein  Gemeinwesen  ahne  OBrigkeit,  (i^od). 

^ See  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  cd.,  Vol.  XXIH,  p.  574.  — Tr. 

® Sec  p.  18. 

® An  inversion  of  Clausewitz’s  famous  expression  that  war  is  a continuation  of  policy  by  otho: 
means.  COn  War,  I,  i,  % — Tr, 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  331 

in  all  successful  diplomacy,  tactics,  strategy;  in  the  competition  of  states  of 
social  classes  or  parties;  has  been  the  product  of  living  unities  that  found 
thenisclves\''in  form/* 

The  word  for  race-  or  breed-education  is  “training**  (Zucht,  ZuchtMn£)y  as 
against  the  shaping  (Bildmg)  v^hich.  creates  communities  of  waking-con- 
ciousness  on  a basis  of  uniform  teachings  or  beliefs.  Books,  for  example,  are 
shaping  agents,  while  the  constant  felt  pulse  and  harmony  of  milim  into  which 
one  feels  oneself,  lives  oneself  — like  a novice  or  a page  of  early  Gothic  times  — 
are  training  influences.  The  “good  form**  and  ceremonies  of  a given  society 
are  sense-presentations  of  the  beat  of  a given  species  of  Being,  and  to  master 
them  one  must  have  the  beat  of  them.  Hence  women,  as  more  instinctive  and 
nearer  to  cosmic  rhythms,  adapt  themselves  more  readily  than  men  to  the  forms 
of  a new  milieu.  Women  from  the  bottom  strata  move  in  elegant  society  with 
entire  certainty  after  a,  few  years  — and  sink  again  as  quickly.  But  men  alter 
slowly,  because  they  are  more  awake  and  aware.  The  proletarian  man  never 
becomes  wholly  an  aristocrat,  the  aristocrat  never  wholly  a proletarian  — 
only  in  the  sons  does  the  beat  of  the  new  milieu  make  its  appearance. 

The  profounder  the  form,  the  stricter  and  more  repellent  it  is.  To  the 
outsider,  therefore,  it  appears  to  be  a slavery;  the  member,  on  the  contrary, 
has  a perfect  and  easy  command  of  it.  The  Prince  de  Ligne  was,  no  less  than 
Mozart,  master  of  the  form  and  not  its  slave;  and  the  same  holds  good  of 
every  born  aristocrat,  statesman,  and  captain. 

In  all  high  Cultures,  therefore,  there  is  a pasantty,  which  is  breed,  stock,  in 
the  broad  sense  (and  thus  to  a certain  extent  nature  herself),  and  a society  which 
is  assertively  and  emphatically  “in  form.**  It  is  a set  of  classes  or  Estates,  and 
no  doubt  artificial  and  transitory.  But  the  history  of  these  classes  and  estates 
h world-history  at  highest  potential.  It  is  only  in  relation  to  it  that  the  peasant 
is  seen  as  historyless.  The  whole  broad  and  grand  history  of  these  six  millen- 
nia has  accomplished  itself  in  the  life-courses  of  the  high  Cultures,  became 
these  Cultures  themselves  placed  their  creative  foci  in  Estates  possessing  breed 
and  training,  and  so  in  the  course  of  fulfilment  became  trained  and  bred.  A 
Culture  is  Soul  that  has  arrived  at  self-expression  in  sensible  forms,  but  these 
forms  arc  living  and  evolving.^  Their  matrix  is  in  the  intensified  Being  of 
individuals  or  groups  — that  is,  in  that  which  I have  just  called  Being  “in 
form.*’  And  when,  and  not  until,  this  Being  is  sufficiently  formed  to  that 
high  rightness,  it  becomes  representative  of  a representable  Culture.^ 

This  Culture  is  not  only  a grand  thing,  but  wholly  unlike  any  other  thing 
in  the  organic  world.  It  is  the  one  point  at  which  man  lifts  himself  above 
the  powers  of  Nature  and  becomes  himself  a Creator.  Even  as  to  race,  breed, 

^ Not  excluding  art,  although  we  are  not  conscious  of  them  save  through  deduction  from  art- 
history. 

® Original:  Uegen  im  gesteigerten  Dascin  vm  Ein^dnen  md  Kreism^  ehen  in  dsm^  was  soehen 

'Dasein  in  Eortn  genamU  warden  ist^  und  dutch  dtese  Hohe  des  Geformtseins  erst  dh  Kaltur  reprdsentirt.*" 


33^  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

he  is  Nature’s  creature  — he  is  bred.  But,  as  Estate,  he  breeds  himself  just  as 
he  breeds  the  noble  kinds  of  animal-plant  with  which  he  surrounds  himself  — 
and  that  process,  too,  is  in  the  deepest  and  most  final  sense  “Culture.”  Culture 
and  class  ^ are  interchangeable  expressions;  they  arise  together  and  they  vanish 
together.  The  breeding  of  select  types  of  wines  or  fruit  or  flowers,  the  breeding 
of  blood  horses,  ij-  Culture,  and  the  culture,  in  exactly  the  same  sense,  of  the 
human  6iite  arises  as  the  expression  of  a Being  that  has  brought  itself  into  high 
“form.” 

For  that  very  reason,  there  is  found  in  every  Culture  a sharp  sense  of  whether 
this  or  that  man  belongs  thereto  or  not.  The  Classical  notion  of  the  Bar- 
barian, the  Arabian  of  the  Unbeliever  (Amhaarez,  Giaour),  the  Indian  of  the 
Sudra  — however  differently  the  lines  of  cleavage  were  arrived  at  — are  alike 
in  that  the  words  do  not  primarily  express  contempt  or  hatred,  but  establish 
that  there  are  differences  in  pulse  of  Being  which  set  an  impassable  barrier 
against  all  contacts  on  the  deeper  levels.  This  perfectly  clear  and  unambiguous 
idea  has  been  obscured  by  the  Indian  concept  of  a “fourth  caste,”  which  caste, 
as  we  know  now,  has  never  existed  at  all.^  The  Code  of  Manu,  with  its  cele- 
brated regulations  for  the  treatment  of  the  Sudra,  is  the  outcome  of  the  fully 
developed  state  of  fellahdom  in  his  India,  and  — irrespective  of  practical 
actualities  under  either  existing  or  even  obtainable  legislation  — described  the 
misty  idea  of  Brahmanism  by  the  negative  mode  of  dealing  with  its  opposite, 
very  much  as  the  Late  Classical  philosophy  used  the  notion  of  the  working 
Banausos.  The  one  has  led  us  into  misunderstanding  caste  as  a specifically 
Indian  phenomenon,  the  other  to  a basically  false  idea  of  the  attitude  of  Classical 
man  towards  work. 

In  all  such  cases  what  really  confronts  us  is  the  residue  which  does  not  count 
for  the  inward  life  of  the  Culture  and  its  symbolism,  and  is  in  principle  left 
out  of  every  really  significant  classification,  somewhat  as  the  “outcast”  is 
ignored  in  the  far  East.  The  Gothic  expression  **  corpus  chfistianum"  indicates 
explicitly  in  its  very  terms  that  the  Jewish  Consensus  does  not  belong  to  it. 
In  the  Arabian  Culture  the  other-believer  is  merely  tolerated  within  the  re- 
spective domains  of  the  Jewish,  the  Persian,  the  Christian,  and,  above  all,  the 
Islamic,  nations,  and  contemptuously  left  to  his  own  administration  and  his 
own  jurisdiction.  In  the  Classical  World  it  was  not  only  barbarians  that  were 
“outcasts”  — so  also  in  a measure  were  slaves,  and  especially  the  relics  of  the 
autochthonous  population  like  the  Penestae  in  Thessaly  and  the  Helots  of  Sparta, 
whom  their  masters  treated  in  a way  that  reminds  us  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Normans  in  Anglo-Saxon  England  and  the  Teutonic  Knights  in  the  Slavonic 
East.  The  Code  of  Manu  preserves,  as  designations  of  Sudra  classes,  the  names 

^ So  in  the  German,  but  see  foot-note  p.  3x9.  ** Stand**  would  have  expressed  the  sense  bet- 
ter. — Tr. 

^ R.  Pick,  Die  sotiale  GUederung  im  norddstUchen  Indten  Buddhas  Zeit  (1897),  p.  xoi;  K.  Hille- 
brandt,  Ak-lndien  (1899),  p.  8x.  [Also  the  article  “ Brahmanism,”  Ency.  Brit.,  XI  ed.  — Tr,] 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  333 

of  aocient  peoples  of  the  “ Coloaiar’  region  of  the  Lower  Ganges.  (As  Magadha 
is  amongst  them,  Buddha  himself  may  have  been  a Sudra,  like  the  ‘‘Caesar” 
Asoka,  whose  grandfather  Chandragnpta  was  of  the  most  humble  origin.) 
Others  are  names  of  callings,  and  this  again  reminds  us  that  also  in  the  West 
and  elsewhere  certain  callings  were  outcast  — the  beggars,  for  example  (who 
in  Homer  are  a class),  smiths,  singers,  and  the  professional  poor,  who  have 
been  bred  literally  en  masse  by  the  caritas  of  the  Church  and  the  benevolence  of 
laymen  in  the  Early  Gothic. 

But,  in  sum,  “ caste**  is  a word  that  has  been  at  least  as  much  abused  as  it 
has  been  used.  There  were  no  castes  in  the  Old  and  Middle  Kingdoms  of 
Egypt,  nor  in  India  before  Buddha,  nor  in  China  before  Han  times.  It  is  only 
in  very  Late  conditions  that  they  appear,  and  then  we  find  them  in  all  Cultures. 
From  the  XXIst  Dynasty  onwards  (r.  iioo  b.c.)  Egypt  was  in  the  hands,  now 
of  the  Theban  priest-caste,  now  of  the  Libyan  warrior-caste;  and  thereafter 
the  hardening  process  went  on  steadily  till  the  time  of  Herodotus  — whose 
view  of  the  conditions  of  his  day  as  characteristically  Egyptian  is  just  as  inac- 
curate as  our  view  of  those  prevailing  in  India.  The  distinction  between  Estate 
and  Caste  is  that  between  earliest  Culture  and  latest  Civilization.  In  the  rise  of  the 
prime  Estates  — noble  and  priest  — the  Culture  is  unfolding  itself,  while  the 
castes  are  the  expression  of  its  definitive  fellah-state.  The  Estate  is  the  most 
living  of  all,  Culture  launched  on  the  path  of  fulfilment,  “ the  form  that  living 
must  itself  unfold.**  ^ The  caste  is  absolute  finished-ness,  the  phase  in  which 
development  has  been  succeeded  by  immutable  fixation. 

But  the  great  Estates  are  something  quite  different  from  occufation-groufs 
like  those  of  artisans,  officials,  artists,  which  are  professionally  held  together 
by  technical  tradition  and  the  spirit  of  their  work.  They  are,  in  fact,  emblems 
in  flesh  and  bloody  whose  entire  being,  as  phenomenon,  as  attitude,  and  as  mode 
of  thought,  possesses  symbolic  meaning.  Within  every  Culture,  moreover  — 
while  peasantry  is  a piece  of  pure  nature  and  growth  and,  therefore,  a completely 
impersonal  manifestation  — nobility  and  priesthood  are  the  results  of  high 
breeding  and  forming  and  therefore  express  a thoroughly  personal  Culture^  which, 
by  the  height  of  its  form,  rejects  not  merely  barbarians,  but  presently  also  all 
who  are  not  of  their  status,  as  a residue  — regarded  by  the  nobility  as  the 
“people**  and  by  clergy  as  the  “laity.**  And  this  style  of  personality  is  the  ma- 
terial that,  when  the  fellah-age  arrives,  petrifies  into  the  type  of  a caste,  which 
thereafter  endures  unaltered  for  centuries.  As  in  the  living  Culture  race  and 
estate  are  in  antithesis  as  the  impcmonal  and  the  personal,  in  fellah-times 
the  mass  and  the  caste^  the  coolie  and  the  Brahmin,  are  in  antithesis  as  the  formless 
and  the  formal.  The  living  form  has  become  formula,  still  possessing  style,  but 
possessing  it  as  stylistic  rigidity.  This  petrified  style  of  the  caste  is  of  an  ex- 
treme subtlety,  dignity,  and  intellectuality,  and  feels  itself  infinitely  superior 

^ See  ¥ol.  I,  p.  — Tf. 


334  ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

to  the  dcvelGpiGg  mankind  of  a Culture  — we  can  hardly  form  an  idea  of 
the  lofty  height  from  which  the  Mandarin  or  the  Brahmin  looks  down  upon 
European  thoughts  and  actions,  or  how  fundamentally  the  Egyptian  priest 
must  have  despised  a visiting  Pythagoras  or  Plato.  It  moves  impassive  through 
time  with  the  Byzantine  dignity  of  a soul  that  has  left  all  its  problems  and 
enigmas  far  behind  it. 

n 

In  the  Carolingian  pre-Culturc.men  distinguished  Kneche,  Freie^  and  Edk. 
This  is  a primitive  differentiation  based  merely  on  the  facts  of  external  life. 
But  in  Early  Gothic  times  it  runs: 

God  hath  shapen  lives  three. 

Boor  and  knight  and  priest  they  be.^ 

Here  wc  have  status-differences  of  a high  Culture  that  has  just  awakened. 
And  the  stole  and  the  sword  stand  together  in  face  of  the  plough  in  strongest 
assertiveness  as  estates  vis-'h-vh  the  rest,  the  Non-Estate,  that  which,  like  them- 
selves, is  fact,  but,  unlike  themselves,  fact  without  deeper  significance.  The 
separation,  inward  and  felt,  is  so  destined,  so  potent,  that  no  understanding 
can  ignore  it.  Hatred  wells  up  out  of  the  villages,  contempt  flashes  back  from 
the  castles.  Neither  possession  nor  power  nor  calling  produced  this  abyss 
between  the  lives.’’  Logical  justification  for  it  there  is  none.  It  is  meta- 
physical nature. 

Later,  with  the  cities,  but  younger  than  they,  hurgherdomy  bourgmsky  arises 
as  the  “Third  Estate.”  The  burgher,  too,  now  looks  with  contempt  upon  the 
countryside,  which  lies  about  him  dull,  unaltered,  and  patient,  and  in  contrast 
to  which  he  feels  himself  more  awake  and  freer  and  therefore  further  advanced 
on  the  road  of  the  Culture.  He  despises  also  the  primary  estates,  “squire  and 
parson,”  as  something  lying  intellectually  below  him  and  historically  behind 
him.  Yet,  as  compared  with  these  two,  the  burgher  is,  as  the  boor  was,  a 
residue,  a non-estate.  In  the  minds  of  the  “ privileged”  the  peasant  hardly  now 
counts  at  all  — the  burgher  counts,  but  as  an  opposite  and  a background.  He 
is  the  foil  against  which  the  others  become  conscious  of  their  own  significance 
and  of  the  fact  that  this  significance  is  something  lying  outside  all  practical 
considerations.  When  we  find  that  in  all  Cultures  the  same  occurs  in  exactly 
the  same  form,  and  that,  however  different  the  symbolism  of  one  Culture  from 
that  of  another,  their  history  fulfils  itself  everywhere  in  and  by  opposition  of 
these  groups  — impulsive  peasant  wars  in  the  Springtime,  intellectually-based 
civil  wzts  in  the  later  period  — then  it  is  evident  that  the  meaning  of  the  facts 
must  be  looked  for  in  the  deepest  foundations  of  Life  itself. 

Got  hdt  driu  khm  geschaffen 
Gehdre^  fitter,  fhaffen. 

[Note  the  collective  attached  to  the  jErst-named.  — Tf.] 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  335 

;Ttis  aa  idea  that  lies  at  the  base  of  these  two  prime  Estates,  and  only  these.': 
It  gives  them  the  potent  feeling  of  a rank  derived  from'  a divine  investiture  and 
therefore  beyond  all  criticism  ~ a standing  which  imposes  self-respect  and  sclf- 
conscionsness,  but  the  sternest  self-discipline  as  well  (and  death  itself  if  need 
be),  as  a duty  and  imbues  both  with  the  historical  superiority,  the  soul-magic, 
that  does  not  draw  upon  power  but  actually  generates  it.  Those  who — 
inwardly,  and  not  merely  nominally  — belong  to  these  Estates  are  actually 
something  other  than  the  residue;  their  lives,  in  contrast  to  those  of  burgher 
and  peasant,  are  sustained  in  every  part  by  a symbolic  dignity.  These  lives  do 
not  exist  in  order  to  be  merely  lived,  but  to  have  meaning.  It  is  the  two  sides  of 
all  freely  moving  life  that  come  to  expression  in  these  Estates;  the  om  is  wholly 
beings  the  other  wholly  waking-consciousness. 

Every  nobility  is  a living  symbol  of  Time^  every  priesthood  of  Space.  Destiny 
and  sacred  Causality,  History  and  Nature,  the  When  and  the  Where,  race 
and  language,  sex-life  and  fceling-Iife . — all  these  attain  in  them  to  the  highest 
possible  expression.  The  noble  lives  in  a world  of  facts,  the  priest  in  one  of 
truths;  the  one  has  shrewdness,  the  other  knowledge;  the  one  is  a doer,  the 
other  a thinker.  Aristocratic  world-feeling  is  essentially  pulse-sense;  priestly 
world-feeling  proceeds  entirely  by  tensions.  Between  the  time  of  Charlemagne 
and  that  of  Conrad  II  something  formed  itself  in  the  time-stream  that  cannot 
be  elucidated,  but  has  to  be  felt  if  we  are  to  understand  the  dawn  of  the  new 
Culture.  There  had  long  been  noblemen  and  ecclesiastics,  but  then  first  — and 
not  for  long  — there  were  nobility  and  clergy,  in  the  grand  sense  of  the  words 
and  the  full  force  of  their  symbolic  significance.^  So  mighty  is  this  onset  of  a 
symbolism  that  at  first  all  other  distinctions,  such  as  those  of  country,  people, 
and  language,  fall  into  the  background.  In  all  the  lands  from  Ireland  to  Calabria 
the  Gothic  hierarchy  was  a single  great  community;  the  Early  Classical 
chivalry  before  Troy,  or  the  Early  Gothic  before  Jerusalem,  seems  to  us  as  of 
one  great  family.  The  old  Egyptian  nomes  and  the  feudal  states  of  the  first 
Ch6u  times  appear,  in  comparison  with  such  Estates  as  these  (and  because  of 
the  comparison)  just  as  colourless  as  Burgundy  and  Lorraine  in  the  Hohenstaufen 
period.  There  is  a cosmopolitan  condition  both  at  the  beginning  and  at  the 
end  of  every  Culture,  but  in  the  first  case  it  exists  because  the  symbolic  might 
of  aristocratic-hierarchic  forms  still  towers  above  those  of  nationality,  and 
in  the  second  because  the  formless  mass  sinks  below  them. 

The  two  Estates  in  principle  exclude  one  another.  The  prime  opposition  of 

^ The  case  with  which  Bolshevism  extinguished  the  four  so-called  estates  or  classes  of  Petrine 
Russia  — nobles,  merchants,  small  townspeople,  and  peasants  — shows  that  these  were  mere  imi- 
tations and  administrative  conveniences,  and  destitute  of  all  symbolism  — for  symbolism  no  power 
on  earth  can  choke.  They  correspond  to  the  outward  difFcrcnccs  of  rank  and  possessions  that  existed 
in  the  Visigothic  and  Frankish  Kingdoms,  and  as  glimpses  afforded  by  the  earliest  parts  of  the 
Iliad  show  — in  Myccnasan  times.  It  is  reserved  for  the  foturc  to  develop  a true  nobility  and  clergy 
in  Russia.  ■ ■ . 


336  ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

cosmic  and  microcosmic,  which  pervades  all  being  that  moves  freely  in  space, 
underlies  this  dual  existence  also.  Each  is  possible  and  necessary  only  through 
the  other.  The  Homeric  world  maintained  a conspiracy  of  hostile  silence 
towards  the  Orphic,  and  in  turn  (as  we  see  from  the  Pre-Socratics)  the  former 
became  an  object  of  anger  and  contempt  for  the  latter.  In  Gothic  times  the 
reforming  spirits  set  themselves  with  a sacred  enthusiasm  across  the  path  of 
the  Renaissance-natures.  State  and  Church  have  never  really  come  to  equilib- 
rium, and  in  the  conflict  of  Empire  and  Papacy  their  opposition  rose  to  an 
intensity  only  possible  for  Faustian  man. 

Of  the  two,  moreover,  it  is  the  nobility  that  is  the  true  Estate,  the  sum  of 
blood  and  race,  being-stream  in  the  fullest  imaginable  form.  And  therefore 
nobility  is  a higher  peasantry.  Even  in  1x50  the  West  had  a widespread  proverb : 
‘'One  who  ploughs  in  the  forenoon  jousts  in  the  afternoon,'*  and  it  was  quite 
usual  for  a knight  to  marry  the  daughter  of  a peasant.  In  contrast  to  the 
cathedral,  the  castle  was  a development,  by  way  of  the  country  noble’s  house 
of  Frankish  times,  from  the  peasant-dwelling.  In  the  Icelandic  sagas  peasants* 
crofts  are  besieged  and  stormed  like  castles.  Nobility  and  peasantry  are  plant- 
like  and  instinctive,  deep-rooted  in  the  ancestral  land,  propagating  themselves 
in  the  family  tree,  breeding  and  bred.  In  comparison  with  them  the  priesthood 
is  essentially  the  counter-estate,  the  estate  of  negation,  of  non-race,  of  detach- 
ment from  earth  — of  free,  timeless,  and  historyless  waking-consciousness. 
In  every  peasant  village,  in  every  peasant  family  from  the  Stone  Age  to  the  peaks 
of  the  Culture,  world-history  plays  itself  out  in  little.  Substitute  for  peoples 
families,  and  for  lands  farms  — still  the  ultimate  meaning  of  their  strivings  is 
the  same  — the  maintenance  of  the  blood,  the  succession  of  the  generations, 
the  cosmic,  woman,  power.  Macbeth  and  King  Lear  might  perfectly  well  have 
been  thought  out  as  village  tragedies  — and  the  fact  is  a proof  of  their  tragic 
truth.  In  all  Cultures  nobility  and  peasantry  appear  in  forms  of  family  descent, 
and  language  itself  connects  them  with  the  sexes,  through  which  life  propa- 
gates itself,  has  history,  and  is  history.  And  as  woman  history,  the  inward 
rank  of  peasant  and  noble  families  is  determined  by  how  much  of  race  their 
women  have  in  them,  how  far  they  Destiny.  And,  therefore,  there  is  deep 
meaning  in  the  fact  that  the  purer  and  more  race-pervaded  world-history  is,  the 
more  the  stream  of  its  public  life  passes  into  and  adapts  itself  to  the  private  lives 
of  individual  great  families.  This,  of  course,  is  the  basis  of  the  dynastic  prin- 
ciple, and  not  only  that,  but  the  basis  of  the  idea  of  world-historical  personality. 
The  existence  of  entire  states  comes  to  depend  on  a few  private  destinies,  vastly 
magnified.  The  history  of  Athens  in  the  fifth  century  is  in  the  main  that  of  the 
Alcmxonidm,  the  history  of  Rome  is  that  of  a few  families  of  the  type  of  the 
Fabii  or  the  Claudii.  The  history  of  states  in  the  Baroque  is,  broadly  speaking, 
that  of  the  operations  of  Habsburg  and  Bourbon  family-politics,  and  its  crises 
take  form  as  marriages  and  wars  of  succession.  The  history  of  Napoleon's 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  337 

second  marriage  comprises  also  the  burning  of  Moscow  and  the  battle  of  Leipzig. 
The  history  of  the  Papacy  is,  right  into  the  eighteenth  century,  that  of  a few 
noble  families  which  competed  for  the  tiara  in  order  to  found  princely  family- 
fortunes.  This  is  true  equally  of  Byzantine  dignitaries  and  English  premiers 
(witness  the  Cecils)  and  even,  in  numerous  instances,  of  great  revolution- 
leaders. 

Of  all  this  the  priesthood  (and  philosophy  so  far  as  it  is  priesthood)  is  the 
direct  negative.  The  Estate  of  pure  waking-consciousness  and  eternal  truths 
combats  time  and  race  and  sex  in  every  sense.  Man  as  peasant  or  noble  turns 
towards,  man  as  priest  turns  away  from,  woman.  Aristocracy  runs  the  danger 
of  dissipating  and  losing  the  broad  being-stream  of  public  life  in  the  petty 
channels  of  its  minor  ancestors  and  relatives.  The  true  priest,  on  the  other 
hand,  refuses  in  principle  to  recognize  private  life,  sex,  family,  the  *‘house.” 
For  the  man  of  race  death  begins  to  be  real  and  appalling  only  when  it  is  death 
without  heirs  — Icelandic  sagas  no  less  than  Chinese  ancestor-worship  teach 
us  this.  He  does  not  entirely  die  who  lives  on  in  sons  and  nephews.  But  for 
the  true  priest  m^iia  vita  in  morte  sumus;  what  he  shall  bequeath  is  intellectual, 
and  rejected  woman  bears  no  part  in  it.  The  phenomenal  forms  of  this  second 
Estate  that  occur  again  and  again  are  celibacy,  cloister,  battlings  with  sex- 
impulse  fought  to  the  extreme  of  self-emasculation,  and  a contempt  for  mother- 
hood which  expresses  itself  in  orgiasm  and  hallowed  prostitution,  and  not  less 
in  the  intellectual  devaluation  of  sexual  life  down  to  the  level  of  Kant’s  vile 
definition  of  marriage.^  Throughout  the  Classical  world  it  was  the  rule  that  in 
the  sacred  precinct,  the  Temenos,  no  one  must  be  born  or  die.  The  timeless 
must  not  come  into  contact  with  time.  It  is  possible  for  the  priest  to  have  an 
intellectual  recognition  of  the  great  moments  of  generation  and  birth,  and  to 
honour  them  sacramentally,  but  experience  them  he  may  not. 

For  while  nobility  is  something,  priesthood  signifies  something,  and  this 
alone  would  be  enough  to  tell  us  that  it  is  the  opposite  of  all  that  is  Destiny 
and  Race  and  Estate,  The  castle,  with  its  chambers  and  towers,  walls  and 
moats,  tells  of  a strong-flowing  life,  but  the  cathedral,  with  its  vaulting  and 
pillars  and  choir,  is,  through  and  through.  Meaning  — that  is  to  say,  Orna- 
ment — and  every  venerable  priesthood  has  developed  itself  up  to  that  marvel- 
lous gravity  and  beauty  of  bearing  in  which  every  item,  from  facial  expression 
and  voice-inflection  to  costume  and  walk,  is  ornament,  from  which  private 
life  and  even  inward  life  have  been  eliminated  as  unessential  — whereas  that 
which  a ripe  aristocracy  (such  as  that  of  eighteenth-century  France)  displays 
and  parades  is  a finished  living.  It  was  Gothic  thought  that  developed  out  of 
the  priest-concept  the  character  indekbiUsi  which,  makes  the  idea  indestructible 
and  wholly  independent  of  the  worthiness  of  its  bearer’s  life  in  the  world-as- 

^ As  a treaty  of  reciprocaf  possession  by  the  two  parties  which  is  made  effective  by  the  recipro- 
cal use  of  their  sex-properties. 


338,  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  W.EST 

history  — but  every  priesthood,  and  consequently  also  all  philosophy  (in  the 
sense  of  the  schools),  contain  it  implicitly.  If  a priest  has  race,  he  leads  an 
outward  existence  like  peasant,  knight,  or  prince.  The  Pope  and  cardinals 
of  the  Gothic  period  were  feudal  princes,  leaders  of  armies,  fond  of  the  chase, 
connoisseurs  and  adepts  in  family  politics.  Among  the  Brahmins  of  the  pre- 
Buddha  “Baroque’'  were  great  landowners,  well-groomed  abbes,  courtiers, 
spendthrifts,  gourmets.^  But  it  was  the  early  period  that  had  learned  to  dis- 
tinguish the  idea  from  the  person  — a notion  diametrically  opposed  to  the 
essence  of  nobility  — and  not  until  the  Age  of  Enlightenment  did  the  priest 
come  to  be  judged,  as  priest,  by  his  private  life,  and  then  not  because  that  age 
had  acquired  sharper  eyes,  but  because  it  had  lost  the  idea. 

The  noble  is  the  man  as  history^  the  priest  is  the  man  as  nature.  History  of  the 
high  kind  is  always  the  expression  and  effect  of  the  being  of  a noble  society; 
and  the  criterion  for  the  relative  importance  of  its  different  events  is  always 
the  pulse  of  this  stream  of  being.  That  is  why  the  battle  of  Cannae  matters 
much  and  the  battles  of  Late  Roman  emperors  matter  not  at  all.  The  coming  of 
a Springtime  consistently  coincides  with  the  birth  of  a primary  nobility,  in 
whose  sentiments  the  prince  is  merely  -primus  inter  pares"'  and  an  object  of 
mistrust.  For  not  only  does  a strong  race  not  need  the  big  individual,  but 
his  existence  is  a reflection  upon  its  worth;  hence  vassal-wars  are  pre-eminently 
the  form  in  which  the  history  of  Early  periods  fulfils  itself,  and  thenceforth  the 
nobility  has  the  fate  of  the  Culture  in  hand.  With  a creative  force  that  is  all 
the  more  impressive  because  it  is  silent.  Being  is  brought  into  form  and  “ con- 
dition.*’ The  pulse  in  the  blood  is  heightened  and  confirmed,  and  for  good. 
For  what  this  creative  rise  to  living  form  is  to  the  Spring  — every  Spring  — 
the  might  of  tradition  is  for  the  Late  — every  Late  — period  — namely,  the  old 
firm  discipline,  the  life-beat,  so  sure  that  it  outlives  the  extinction  of  all  the 
old  families  and  continually  draws  under  its  spell  new  men  and  new  being- 
streams  out  of  the  deep.  Beyond  a shadow  of  doubt,  all  the  history  of  Late 
periods,  in  respect  of  form  and  beat  and  tempo,  is  inherent  (and  irrevocably  so) 
in  the  very  earliest  generations.  Its  successes  are  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
strength  of  the  tradition  in  the  blood.  In  politics,  as  in  all  other  great  and 
mature  arts,  success  presupposes  a being  in  high  condition,  a great  stock  of 
pristine  experiences  unconsciously  and  unquestioningly  stored  up  as  instincts 
and  impulses.  There  is  no  other  sort  of  political  maestria  but  this.  The  big 
individual  is  only  something  better  than  an  incident,  only  master  of  the  future, 
in  that  he  is  effective  (or  is  made  effective),  is  Destiny  (or  has  Destiny),  in  and 
through  this  form.  This  is  what  distinguishes  necessary  from  superfluous  art 
and  therefore,  also,  historically  necessary  from  unnecessary  politics.  It  matters 
little  if  many  of  the  big  men  come  up  out  of  the  “ people”  (that  is,  the  aggre- 
gate of  the  traditionless)  into  the  governing  stratum,  or  even  if  they  arc  the 
^ Oldenbcrg,  Z)#V  Lfhrt  dir  Upmishaden  p.  5. 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD-  ' . B9 

oaly  ones  left  to  occupy  it  — the  great  tide  of  tradition  takes  charge  of  them, 
all  unwitting,  forms  their  intellectual  and  practical  conduct,  and  rules  their 
methods.  And  this  tradition  is  nothing  but  the  pulse  of  ancient  and  long- 
extinguished  ■ lines. 

But  Civilkation,  the  real  “return  to  Nature,'*  is  the  extinction  of  nobility 
— not  as  physical  stock  (which  would  not  matter),  but  as  living  tradition  — 
and  the  supplanting  of  destiny-pulse  by  causal  intelligence.  With  this,  no- 
bility becomes  no  more  than  a prefix.  And,  for  that  very  reason,  Civilmed 
history  is  superficial  history,  directed  disjointedly  to  obvious  aims,  and  so 
become  formless  in  the  cosmic,  dependent  on  the  accident  of  great  individuals, 
destitute  of  inward  surencss,  line,  and  meaning.  With  Cxsarism  history  re- 
lapses back  into  the  historyless,  the  old  beat  of  primitive  life,  with  endless  and 
meaningless  battles  for  material  power,  such  as  those  of  the  Roman  soldier- 
emperors  of  the  third  century  and  the  corresponding  “Sixteen  States’*  of  China 
(z65-4io),  which  differ  only  in  unessentials  from  the  events  of  beast-life  in  a 
jungle. 

Ill 

It  follows  from  this  that  true  history  is  not  “cultural”  in  the  sense  of  anti- 
political, as  the  philosophers  and  doctrinaires  of  all  commencing  Civilizations 
assert.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  breed  history,  war  history,  diplomatic  history, 
the  history  of  being-streams  in  the  form  of  man  and  woman,  family,  people, 
estate,  state,  reciprocally  defensive  and  offensive  in  the  wave-beat  of  grand 
facts.  Politics  in  the  highest  sense  is  life,  and  life  is  politics.  Every  man  is  willy- 
nilly  a member  of  this  battle-drama,  as  subject  or  as  object  — there  is  no 
third  alternative.  The  kingdom  of  the  spirit  is  not  of  this  world.  True,  but  ft 
presupposes  it,  as  waking-being  presupposes  being.  It  is  only  possible  as  a 
consistent  saving  of  “no**  to  the  actuality  that  nevertheless  exists  and,  indeed, 
must  exist  before  it  can  be  renounced.  Race  can  dispense  with  language,  but’ 
the  very  speaking  of  a language  is  an  expression  of  antecedent  race,^  as  are 
religions  and  arts  and  styles  of  thought  and  everything  else  that  happens  in  the 
history  of  the  spirit  — and  that  there  is  such  a history  is  shown  by  the  power 
that  blood  possesses  over  feeling  and  reason.  For  all  these  are  active  waking- 
consciousness “in  form,”  expressive,  in  their  evolution  and  symbolism  and  pas- 
sion, of  the  blood  (again  the  blood)  that  courses  through  these  forms  in  the 
waking-being  of  generation  after  generation.  A hero  does  not  need  to  know  any- 
thing at  all  of  this  second  world  — he  is  life  through  and  through  — but  a saint 
can  only  by  the  severest  asceticism  beat  down  the  life  that  is  in  him  and  gain 
solitary  communion  with  his  spirit  — and  his  strength  for  this  again  comes  from 
life  itself.  The  hero  despises  death  and  the  saint  life,  but  in  the  contrast  between 
the  heroism  of  great  ascetics  and  martyrs  and  the  piety  of  most  (which  is  of 


340  > ■ , THE  ' DECLINE,  OF  THE  WEST 

thc'  kind' described  in  Revels  in,  i6  0 we  discover  that  greatness,  even  in 

religion,  presupposes  Race,  that  life  must  be  strong  indeed  to  be  worthy  *of 
such  wrestlers.  The  rest  is  mere  philosophy. 

For  this  very  reason  nobility  in  the  world-historical  sense  is  much  more  than 
comfortable  Late  periods  consider  it;  it  is  not  a sum  of  titles  and  privileges  and 
ceremonies^  but  an  inward  possession,  hard  to  acquire,  hard  to  retain  — worth, 
indeed,  for  those  who  understand,  the  sacrifice  of  a whole  life.  An  old  family 
betokens  not  simply  a set  of  ancestors  (we  all  have  ancestors),  but  ancestors 
who  lived  through  whole  generations  on  the  heights  of  history;  who  not 
merely  had  Destiny,  but  were  Destiny;  in  whose  blood  the  form  of  happening 
was  bred  up  to  its  perfection  by  the  experience  of  centuries.  As  history  in  the 
grand  sense  begins  with  the  Culture,  it  was  mere  panache  for  a Colonna  to 
trace  back  his  ancestry  into  Late  Roman  times.  But  it  was  not  meaningless 
for  the  grandee  of  Late  By2:antium  to  derive  himself  from  Constantine,  nor  is  it 
so  for  an  American  of  to-day  to  trace  his  ancestry  to  a Mayflower  immigrant  of 
162.0.  In  actual  fact  Classical  nobility  begins  with  the  Trojan  period  and  not 
the  Mycenaean,  and  the  Western  with  the  Gothic  and  not  the  Franks  and  Goths 
— in  England  with  the  Normans  and  not  the  Saxons.  Only  from  these  real 
starting-points  is  there  History,  and,  therefore,  only  from  then  can  there  be  an 
original  aristocracy,  as  distinct  from  nobles  and  heroes.  That  which  in  the  first 
chapter  of  this  volume  ^ I called  cosmic  beat  or  pulse  receives  in  this  aristocracy 
its  fulfilment.  For  all  that  in  riper  times  we  call  diplomatic  and  social  “tact** 
— which  includes  strategic  and  business  flair,  the  collector’s  eye  for  precious 
things,  and  the  subtle  insight  of  the  judge  of  men  — and  generally  all  that 
which  one  has  and  does  not  learn;  which  arouses  the  impotent  envy  of  the  rest 
who  cannot  participate;  which  as  ‘Torm”  directs  the  course  of  events;  is  noth- 
ing but  a particular  case  of  the  same  cosmic  and  dreamlike  sureness  that  is  visibly 
expressed  in  the  circlings  of  a flock  of  birds  or  the  controlled  movements  of  a 
thoroughbred  horse. 

The  priest  circumscribes  the  world-as-nature  and  deepens  his  picture  of  it  by 
thinking  into  it.  The  noble  lives  in  the  world-as-history  and  deepens  it  by 
altering  its  picture.  Both  evolve  towards  the  great  tradition,  but  the  evolution 
of  the  one  comes  of  shaping  and  that  of  the  other  from  training.  This  is  a 
fundamental  difference  between  the  two  Estates,  and  consequently  only  one  of 
them  is  truly  an  Estate,  and  the  other  only  appears  to  be  such  because  of  the  com- 
pleteness of  the  contrast.  The  field  of  effect  of  breed  and  training  is  the  blood, 
and  they  pass  on,  therefore,  from  the  fathers  to  the  sons.  Shaping  (Bildm^, 
on  the  other  hand,  presupposes  talents,  and  consequently  a true  and  strong 
priesthood  is  always  a sum  of  individual  gifts  — a community  of  waking- 

^ “So,  then,  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I will  spue  thee  out  of  my 
mouth.” 

^ P.  4,  ct  seq. 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  ' 341 

consciousness  — having  no  relation  to  origin  in  the  race  sense;  and  thus.,  in  this 
respect, as  in,  o.thers,  it  is  a negation  of  Time  and  History.  Inteilectiial  affinity ... 
and  hlood-affinity  • — ponder  .and  probe  into  the  depths  of  these  contrasted 
expressions!,.  Heritable  priesthood  is  a .contradiction  in  terms.  Tt  existed  in- 
•deed,  in, a .sense,  in  .Vedic  India,  .but  the  basis  of  that  existence  was; the  fact 
that  there  was  a second  nobility,  which  reserved  the  privilege  of  priesthood  to 
, the  .gif ted. members  of  its  own  circle.^  . And  elsewhere  celibacy  .made  an  end  even 
of  this'  much  infringement  of  principle.  The  ** priest  in  the  man''  — whether 
the  man  be  noble  or  not  — stands  for  a focus  of  sacred  Causality  in  the  world. 
The  priestly  power' is  itself  of  a causal  nature,  brought  about  by  higher  causes 
and  itself  in  turn  an  efficient  cause.  The  priest  is  the  middleman  in  the  timeless 
extended  that  is  stretched  taut  between  the  waking-consciousness  and  the 
ultimate  secret;  and,  therefore,  the  importance  of  the  clergy  in  each  Culture  is 
determined  fay  its  prime-symbol.  The  Classical  soul  denies  Space  and  therefore 
needs  no  middleman  for  dealings  with  it,  and  so  the  Classical  priesthood  dis- 
appears in  its  very  beginnings.  Faustian  man  stands  face  to  face  with  the  In- 
finite, nothing  pwri  shields  him  from  the  crushing  force  of  this  aspect,  and 
so  the  Gothic  priesthood  elevated  itself  to  the  heights  of  the  Papal  idea. 

As  two  world-outlooks,  two  modes  of  blood-flow  in  the  veins  and  of  thought 
in  the  daily  being  and  doing,  are  interwoven,  there  arise  in  the  end  (in  every 
Culture)  two  sorts  of  moral,  of  which  each  looks  down  upon  the  other  — 
namely,  noble  custom,  and  priestly  askesis,  reciprocally  censured  as  worldly 
and  as  servile.  It  has  been  shown  already  ^ how  the  one  proceeds  from  the 
castle  and  the  other  from  the  cloister  and  the  minster,  the  one  from  full  being 
in  the  flood  of  History  and  the  other,  aloof  therefrom,  out  of  pure  waking- 
consciousness  in  the  ambiance  of  a God-pervaded  nature.  The  force  with  which 
these  primary  impressions  act  upon  men  is  something  that  later  periods  will  be 
unable  even  to  imagine.  The  secular  and  the  spiritual  class-feeling  are  starting 
on  their  upward  career,  and  cutting  out  for  themselves  an  ethical  class-ideal 
which  is  accessible  only  to  the  right  people,  and  even  to  them  only  by  way  of 
long  and  strict  schooling.  The  great  being-stream  feels  itself  as  a unit  as  against 
the  residue  of  dull,  pulseless,  and  aimless  blood.  The  great  mind-community 
knows  itself  as  a unit  as  against  the  residue  of  uninitiated.  These  units  are  the 
band  of  heroes  and  the  community  of  saints. 

It  will  always  remain  the  great  merit  of  Nietzsche  that  he  was  the  first  to 
recognize  the  dual  nature  of  all  moral.®  His  designations  of  ‘‘master-"  and 
“slave-"  moral  were  inexact,  and  his  presentation  of  “Christianity"  placed  it 
much  too  definitely  on  the  one  side  of  the  dividing  line,  but  at  the  basis  of  all  his 
opinions  this  lies  strong  and  clear,  that  good  and  had  are  aristocratic ^ and  good  and 

^ The  case  of  Egypt  is  of  course  similar.  — Tf. 

2 Pp.  2.71,  et  seq. 

* ® Jenseits  mn  Gut  uni  Bose^  § 


34x:  ' .THE'  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

wtl  pkstly^  distinctions.  Good  and  bad,  which  are  Totcmistic  distinctions 
among  primitive  groups  of  men  and  tribes,  describe,  not  dispositions,  but  men, 
and  describe  them  comprehensively  in  respect  of  their  living-being.  The  good 
are  the  powerful,  the  rich,  the  fortunate.  Good  means  strong,  brave,  thorough- 
bred, in  the  idiom  of  every  Springtime.  Bad,  cheap,  wretched,  common,  in  the 
original  sense,  are  the  powerless,  propertyless,  unfortunate,  cowardly,  negli- 
gible— the  “sons  of  nobody*’  as  ancient  Egypt  said. V Good  and  evil.  Taboo 
concepts,  assign  value  to  a man  according  to  his  perceptions  and  reason — 
that  is,  his  waking  disposition  and  his  conscious  actions.  To  offend  against 
love-ethic  in  the  race  sense  is  ungentle,  to  sin  against  the  Church’s  love-com- 
mand is  wicked.  The  noble  habit  is  the  perfectly  unconscious  result  of  a long 
and  continuous  training.  It  is  learned  in  intercourse  and  not  from  books.  It  is 
a felt  rhythm,  and  not  a notion.  But  the  other  moral  is  enunciated,  ordered 
on  the  basis  of  cause  and  consequence,  and  therefore  learnable  and  expressive 
of  a conviction. 

The  one  is  historical  through  and  through,  and  recognizes  rank-distinctions 
and  privileges  as  actual  and  axiomatic.  Honour  is  always  class-honour  — 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  “honour  of  humanity.”  The  duel  is  not  an  obli- 
gation of  unfree  persons.  Every  man,  be  he  Bedouin  or  Samurai  or  Corsican,  , 
peasant  or  workman,  judge  or  bandit,  has  his  own  binding  notions  of  honour, 
loyalty,  courage,  revenge,  that  do  not  apply  to  other  kinds  of  life.  Every  life 
has  custom-ethic  — it  is  unthinkable  without  it.  Children  have  it  already  in 
their  play;  they  know  at  once,  of  themselves,  what  is  fitting.  No  one  has  laid 
down  these  rules,  but  they  exist.  They  arise,  quite  unconsciously,  out  of  the 
“we”  that  has  formed  itself  out  of  the  uniform  pulse  of  the  group.  Here,  too, 
each  being  is  “in  form.”  Every  crowd  that,  under  one  or  another  stimulus, 
has  collected  in  the  street  has  for  the  moment  its  own  ethic,  and  anyone  who 
does  not  absorb  it  and  stand  for  it  as  self-evident  — to  $ay  “follow  it”  would 
presume  more  rationality  in  the  action  than  there  is  ^ — is  a poor,  mean  creature, 
an  outsider.  Uneducated  people  and  children  possess  an  astonishingly  fine 
reactivity  to  this.  Children,  however,  are  also  required  to  learn  the  Catechism, 
and  in  it  they  hear  about  the  good  and  evil  that  are  laid  down  — and  are  any 
thing  rather  than  self-evident.  Custom-ethic  is  not  that  which  is  tme^  but  that 
which  is  there;  it  is  a thing  of  birth  and  growth,  feeling  and  organic  logic. 
Moral,  in  contrast  to  this,  is  never  actuality  (for,  if  it  were,  all  the  world  would 
be  saintly),  but  an  eternal  demand  hanging  over  the  consciousness  — and,  ex 
hypthesi,  over  that  of  all  men  alike,  irrespective  of  all  differences  of  actual  life 
and  history.  And,  therefore,  all  moral  is  negative  and  ail  custom-ethic  affirma- 
tive. In  the  latter  “devoid  of  honour”  is  the  worst,  in  the  former  “devoid  of 
sin”  is  the  highest,  that  can  be  said  of  anyone. 

The  basic  concept  of  all  living  custom-ethic  is  honour.  Everything  else 
^ In  contrast,  the  Spanish  word  ** Hddalgo*\mcms  “son  of  somebody.”  — Tr. 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  343 

loyalty,  modesty,  bravery,  chivalry,  self-control,  resolution  — is  comprised 
in  it.  And  honour  is  a matter  of  the  blood  and  not  of  the  reason.  One  does  not 
reflect  on  a point  of  honour  — that  is  already  dishonour.  To  lose  honour 
means  to  be  annulled  so  far  as  Life  and  Time  and  History  are  concerned.  The 
honour  of  onc*s  class,  one’s  family,  of  man  and  vv-oman,  of  one’s  people  and  one’s 
country,  the  honour  of  peasant  and  soldier  and  even  bandit  — honour  means 
that  the  life  in  a person  is  something  that  has  worth,  historical  dignity,  del- 
icacy, nobility.  It  belongs  to  directional  Time,  as  sin  belongs  to  timeless  Space. 
To  have  honour  in  one’s  body  means  about  the  same  as  to  have  race.  The 
opposite  sort  are  the  Thersites-natures,  the  mud-souled,  the  riff-raff,  the  **  kick- 
me-but-Iet-me-live’s.”  To  submit  to  insult,  to  forget  a humiliation,  to  quail 
before  an  enemy  — all  these  are  signs  of  a life  become  worthless  and  super- 
fluous. But  this  is  not  at  all  the  same  thing  as  priestly  moral,  for  that  moral  does 
not  cleave  to  life  at  any  cost  of  degradation,  but  rather  rejects  and  abstains 
from  life  as  such,  and  therefore  incidentally  from  honour.  As  has  been  said 
already,  every  moral  action  is,  at  the  very  bottom,  a piece  of  askesis  and  a killing 
of  being.  And  ipo  it  stands  outside  the  field  of  life  and  the  world  of  history. 

IV 

Here  it  is  necessary  to  anticipate  somewhat,  and  to  consider  whence  it  is 
that  world-history  (especially  in  the  Late  periods  of  the  grand  Cultures  and 
the  beginnings  of  the  Civilizations)  derives  its  rich  variety  of  colour  and  the 
profound  symbolism  of  its  events.  The  primary  Estates,  nobility  and  clergy, 
are  the  purest  expressions  of  the  two  sides  of  life,  but  they  are  not  the  only 
ones.  In  very  early  times  — often,  indeed,  foreshadowed  in  the  Primitive 
Age  itself  — yet  Other  being-streams  and  waking-linkages  break  forth,  in 
which  the  symbolism  of  Time  and  Space  comes  to  living'expression,  and  which, 
when  (and  not  until)  combined  with  these  two,  make  up  the  whole  fullness 
of  what  we  call  social  organization  or  society. 

While  Priesthood  is  microcosmic  and  animal-like.  Nobility  is  cosmic  and 
plantlike  (hence  its  profound  connexion  with  the  land).  It  is  itself  a plant, 
strongly  rooted  in  the  soil,  established  on  the  soil  — in  this,  as  in  so  many 
other  respects,  a supreme  peasantry.  It  is  from  this  kind  of  cosmic  boundness 
that  the  idea  of  property  arises,  which  to  the  microcosm  as  such,  freely  moving 
in  space,  is  wholly  alien.  Property  is  a primary  feeling  and  not  a concept;  it 
belongs  to  Time  and  History  and  Destiny,  and  not  to  Space  and  Causality. 
It  cannot  be  logically  based,  but  it  is  there.  ^ “ Having”  begins  with  the  plant, 
and  propagates  itself  in  the  history  of  higher  mankinds  just  to  the  precise 
extent  that  history  contains  plant-character  and  race.  Hence  property  in  the 
most  genuine  sense  is  always  ground-property,  and  the  impulse  to  convert 

^ Conversely,  it  can  successfully  be  contfoverted  — and  often  has  been  so  in  the  Chinese  and 
Classical,  Indian  and  Western  philosophic  — but  it  does  not  get  abolished. 


344^^  ^ decline  of  THE  WEST 

other  acquisitions  into  ground  and  soil  is  an  evidence  of  sound  stock.  The 
plant  the  ground  in  which  it  roots.  It  is  its  property,/  whiGh  it  defends 

■ to  the  utmost,  with  the  desperate  force  of  its  whole  being,  against  alien  seeds, 
against  overshadowing  neighbour  plants,  against  all  nature.  So,  too,  a bird 
defends  the  nest  in  which  it  is  hatching.  The  bitterest  fights'  over  property 
occur  --  not  in  the  Late  periods  of  great  Cultures,  between  rich  and  poor,  and 
about  movable  goods  — but  here  in  the  beginnings  of  the  plant-world.  When, 
in  a wood,  one  feels  all  about  one  the  silent,  merciless  battle  for  the  soil  that 
goes  on  day  and  night,  one  is  appalled  by  the  depth  of  an  impulse  that  is  almost 
identical  with  life  itself.  Here  is  a yearlong,  tenacious,  embittered  wrestle, 
a hopeless  resistance  of  the  weak  against  the  strong,  that  goes  on  to  the  point 
that  the  victor  too  is  broken  — such  as  is  only  paralleled  in  the  most  primitive 
of  mankind  when  an  old  peasant-family  is  expelled  from  the  clod,  fmm  the  mst^ 
or  a family  of  noble  stock  is  uprooted  or,  more  truly,  cut  off  from  its  roots,  by 
money.^  The  far  more  conspicuous  conflicts  in  the  later  cities  have  quite 
another  meaning,  for  here  — in  communism  of  all  kinds  — it  is  not  the  ex- 
perience of  possessing,  but  the  idea  of  property  purely  as  material  means  that  is 
fought  for.  The  negation  of  property  is  never  race-impulse,  but  the  doctrinaire 
protest  of  the  purely  intellectual,  urban,  uprooted,  anti-vegetal  waking-con- 
sciousness of  saints,  philosophers,  and  idealists.  The  same  reason  actuates 
the  monk  of  the  hermitage  and  the  scientific  Socialist  — be  his  name  Moh-ti, 
Zeno,  or  Marx  — to  reject  the  plantlike;  the  same  feeling  impels  men  of  race 
to  defend  it.  Here,  as  ever,  fact  and  truth  are  opposed.  “Property  is  theft*' 
is  the  ultra-materialistic  form  of  the  old  thought:  “What  shall  it  profit  a man 
if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul?**  When  the  priest  gives 
up  property,  he  is  giving  up  something  dangerous  and  alien;  when  a noble 
does  so,  he  is  giving  up  himself. 

This  brings  us  to  a duality  of  the  property-idea  feeling  — ■ Having  as  power  md 
Having  as  spoil.  Both,  in  primitive  men  of  race,  lie  immediately  together. 
Every  Bedouin  or  Viking  intends  both.  The  sea-hero  is  always  a sea-robber 
also;  every  war  is  concerned  with  possessions  and,  above  all,  possessions  in 
land.  But  a step,  and  the  knight  becomes  the  robber-knight,  the  adventurer 
becomes  conqueror  and  king,  like  Rurik  the  Norman  in  Russia  and  many  an 
Achasan  and  Etruscan  pirate  in  Homeric  times.  In  all  heroic  poetry  we  find, 

^ The  possession  of  movable  things  (food,  equipment,  arms)  comes  later,  and  is  of  much  iower 
symbolic  weight.  It  occurs  widely  in  the  animal  world.  The  bird‘s  nest,  on  the  contrary,  is  a 
property  of  plantlikc  kind. 

^ Property  in  this  most  significant  sense  — the  having  grown  up  with  something  — refers  there- 
fore less  to  the  particiHar  person  than  to  the  family  tree  to  which  he  belongs.  In  every  quarrel  within 
a peasant  or  even  within  a princely  family,  this  is  the  deep  and  violent  element.  The  master  for  the 
time  being  holds  possession  only  in  the  name  of  the  family  line.  Hence,  too,  the  terror  of  death  with- 
out heirs,  Proprty  also  is  a Time-symbol^  and  consequently  it  is  closely  related  to  marriage,  which  is 
a firm  plantlike  intergrowth  and  mutual  possession  of  two  human  beings,  so  real  as  to  be  even 
reflected  in  an  increasing  facial  similarity. 


NOBILITY  AND.  P'RIEST.HOOD  . . 345, 

side  by  side  with  the  strong  .and ' natural  satisfaction  . of,  winning  battles:  and 
power  and  wo-inen,  and  the.  unbridled  outbursts  of  .joy  and,  grief,  anger,,  and  . 
love,  the  immense  delight  of  ‘‘.having.”  When  Odysseus  lands  at  home,  the 
first  thing  he  does  is  to  count  the-, treasures  in  his  boat,  and  when,  in  the  Ice- 
landic Saga,  the  peasants  Hjalmar'  and  Olvarod  ..perceive  each  that  the  other  ■. 
has  no  goods  in  his  ship,  they  abandon  their-.duel  at  o,nee  •—  he  who  fights  .froiB  ' 
pride  and  for  honour  is  a fool  for  his  .pains.  In  the.  Indian  hero-epic,  eagerness,, 
for  battle  means  eagerness  for.  cattle,  and  the  ‘'  colonizing”  Greeks  of  the  tenth 
century  were  primarily  corsairs  like  the  Normans.  On  the  high  seas  an  alien 
ship  .is  a priori  good  prize.  \ B.ut  out  of  the  feuds : of  S.outh- Arabian  and  Persian 
.Knights  of  A.D.  loo,  and  the  “private  wars’* of  the  Provengal  barons.of  a.b.  iioo 
— which  were  hardly  more  than  cattle-raids  — there  .developed  at  the  end  of  the 
feudal  period  the  war  proper,  the  great  war  with  acquisition  of  land  and  people 
as  its  object.  All  this,  in  the  end,  brings  the  aristocratic  Gulture  to  the  “top 
of  its  form,**  while,  correspondingly,  priests  and  philosophers  despise  it. 

As  the  Culture  rises  to  its  height,  these  two  primary  urges  trend  widely 
apart,  and  hostility  develops  between  them,  Th  Msforj  of  this  hostility  is  almost 
the  same  thing  as  world-history . From  the  feeling  of  power Mome  conquest  and  politics  and 
law;  from  that  of  spoils  trade  and  economy  and  money.  Law  is  the  property  of  the 
powerful.  Their  law  is  the  law  of  all.  Money  is  the  strongest  weapon  of  the 
acquiring:  with  it  he  subdues  the  world.  Economics  likes  and  intends  a 
state  that  is  weak  and  subservient  to  it.  Politics  demands  that  economic  life 
shall  adapt  itself  to  and  within  the  State  “ Adam  Smith  and  Friedrich  List, 
Capitalism  and  Socialism.  All  Cultures  exhibit  at  the  outset  a war-  and  a 
trade-nobility,  then  a land-  and  a money-nobility,  and  finally  a military  and 
an  economic  war-management  and  a ceaseless  struggle  of  money  against  law. 

Equally,  on  the  other  hand,  priesthood  and  learning  separate  out.  Both  are 
directed  towards,  not  the  factual,  but  the  true;  both  belong  to  the  Taboo  side 
of  life  and  to  Space.  Fear  before  death  is  the  source,  not  merely  of  ail  religion, 
but  of  all  philosophy  and  natural  science  as  well.  Now,  however,  there  de- 
velops a profane  Causality  in  contrast  to  the  sacred.  “Profane**  is  the  new 
counter-concept  to  “religious,**  which  so  far  had  tolerated  learning  only  as  a 
handmaiden.  The  whole  of  Late  criticism,  its  spirit,  its  method,  its  aims,  are 
profane  — and  the  Late  theology,  even,  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.  But  in- 
variably, nevertheless,  the  learning  of  all  Cultures  moves  in  the  forms  of  the 
preceding  priesthood  — thus  showing  that  it  is  merely  a product  of  the  con- 
tradiction itself,  and  how  dependent  it  is  and  remains,  in  every  particular,  upon 
the  primary  image.  Classical  science,  therefore,  lives  in  cult-communities 
of  the  Orphic  style,  such  as  the  school  of  Miletus,  the  Pythagorean  society, 
the  medical  schools  of  Croton  and  Cos,  the  Attic  schools  of  the  Academy,  the 
Peripatos,  and  the  Stoa,  every  one  of  whose  leaders  belongs  to  the  type  of  the 
sacrificial  priest  and  seer,  and  even  the  Roman  legal  schools  of  the  Sabiniani 


346  ' ■ THE  DECLINE  OE  THE  WEST' 

and  Procnliani.  The  sacred  book,  the  Canon  is,  scientifically  as  in  other  re- 
spects, Arabian  — the  scientific  canon  of  Ptolemy  (Almagest),  the  medical  of 
Ibn  Sina  (Avicenna),  and  the  philosophical  corpus  designated  Aristotle,’*  but 
so  largely  spurious  — so  also  the  (mostly  unwritten)  laws  and  methods  of  quo- 
tation: ^ the  Commentary  as  the  form  of  thought-development;  the  universities 
as  cloisters  (Medrashim)  which  provided  teachers  and  students  with  cell,  food, 
and  clothing;  and  tendencies  in  scholarship  taking  form  as  brotherhoods.  The 
learned  world  of  the  West  possesses  unmistakably  the  form  of  the  Catholic 
Church,  and  more  particularly  so  in  Protestant  regions.  The  connecting  link 
between  the  learned  orders  of  the  Gothic  period  and  the  order-like  schools 
of  the  nineteenth  century  • — the  schools  of  Hegel,  of  Kant,  of  historical  juris- 
prudence, and  not  a few  of  the  English  university  colleges  — is  formed  by  the 
Maurists  and  Bollandists  ^ of  France,  who  from  1650  on  mastered  and  largely 
created  the  ancillary  “science**  of  history.  In  all  the  specialist  sciences  (medi- 
cine and  lecture-room  philosophy  included)  there  are  fully  developed  hierarchies 
leading  up  to  school-popes,  grades,  and  dignities  (the  doctor’s  degree  as  an 
ordination),  sacraments  and  councils.  The  uninitiate  is  rigorously  treated  as 
the  “ layman,”  and  the  idea  of  a generalized  priesthood  residing  in  the  believers 
themselves,  which  is  manifested  in  “popular”  science  — for  example,  Darwin- 
ism — is  passionately  combated.  The  language  of  learning  was  originally 
Latin,  but  to-day  all  sorts  of  special  languages  have  formed  themselves  which 
(in  the  domain  of  radioactivity,  for  example,  or  that  of  the  law  of  contract) 
are  unintelligible  save  to  those  who  have  received  the  higher  initiation.  There 
are  founders  of  sects,  such  as  many  of  Kant’s  and  Hegel’s  disciples  were; 
there  are  missionaries  to  the  unbelievers,  like  the  Monists.  There  are  heretics, 
like  Schopenhauer  and  Nietzsche,  there  is  the  weapon  of  the  ban,  and  there  is 
the  Index  in  the  form  of  the  Conspiracy  of  Silence.  There  arc  ethical  truths 
(for  example,  in  Law  the  division  of  the  objects  into  persons  and  things)  and 
dogmas  (like  that  of  energy  and  mass,  or  the  theory  of  inheritance),  a ritual  in 
the  citation  of  orthodox  writings,  and  even  a scientific  sort  of  beatification.^ 

More,  the  savant-type  of  the  West  (which  in  the  nineteenth  century  reached 
its  zenith,  corresponding  to  the  nadir  of  true  priesthood)  has  brought  to  high 
perfection  the  study  as  the  cell  of  a profane  monachism  that  has  its  unconscious 
vows  — of  Poverty,  in  the  shape  of  honourable  disdain  for  fat  living  and 
wealth,  and  unfeigned  contempt  for  the  commercial  professional  and  for  all 
exploitation  of  scientific  results  for  gain;  of  Chastity,  which  has  evolved  a 
veritable  celibacy  of  science,  with  Kant  as  exemplar  and  culmination;  and  of 
Obedience,  even  to  the  point  of  sacrificing  oneself  to  the  standpoint  of  the 

^ Seep.  148. 

2 Sec  these  headings  in  Ency.  Brit.,  XI.  cd.  — Tr. 

® After  death  the  teachers  of  error  arc  excluded  from  the  eternal  bliss  of  the  text-book  and  cast 
into  the  purgatorial  fires  of  foot-notes,  whence,  purged  by  the  intercession  of  the  believer,  they 
ascend  into  the  paradise  of  the  paragraphs. 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  ^ ^ \ 

School.  FEtthcf,  aad  lastly,  there  is  a sort  of  estrangement  from,  the  world 
which  is  the  profane  echo  of  the  Gothic  flight  from  it,  and  leads  to  an  almost 
complete  disregard  of  the  life  in  public  and  the  forms  of  good  society  — little 
“breeding,**  much  too  much  “shaping.**  Nobility,  even  in  its  later  rami- 
fications — the  judge,  the  squire,  the  officer  — still  retains  the  old  root-strong 
natural  satisfaction  in  carrying  on  the  stock,  in  possessions  and  honour,  but  the 
scientist  counts  these  things  as  little  beside  the  possession  of  a pure  scientific 
conscience  and  the  carrying  on  of  a method  or  a view  unimpaired  by  the  com- 
mercialism of  the  world.  The  fact  that  the  savant  to-day  has  ceased  to  be 
remote  from  the  world,  and  puts  his  science  at  the  service  of  (not  seldom,  indeed, 
most  shrewdly  applies  it  to)  technics  and  money-making,  is  a sign  that  the  pure 
type  is  entering  upon  its  decline  and  that  the  great  age  of  intellectual  optimism 
that  is  livingly  expressed  in  him  belongs  already  to  the  past. 

In  sum,  we  see  that  the  Estates  have  a natural  build  which  in  its  evolution 
and  action  forms  the  basic  structure  of  every  Culture’s  life-course.  No  specific 
decision  made  it;  revolutions  only  alter  it  when  they  are  forms  of  the  evolution 
and  not  results  of  some  private  will.  It  never,  in  its  full  cosmic  significance, 
enters  the  consciousness  of  men  as  doers  and  thinkers,  because  it  lies  too  deep 
in  human  being  to  be  other  than  a self-evident  datum.  It  is  merely  from  the 
surface  that  men  take  the  catchwords  and  causes  over  which  they  fight  on  that 
side  of  history  which  theory  regards  as  horizontally  layered,  but  which  in 
actuality  is  an  aggregate  of  inseparable  interpenetrations.  First,  nobility  and 
priesthood  arise  out  of  the  open  landscape,  and  figure  the  pure  symbolism 
of  Being  and  Waking-Being,  Time  and  Space.  Then  out  of  the  one  under  the 
aspect  of  booty,  and  out  of  the  other  under  the  aspect  of  research,  there  de- 
velop doubled  types  of  lower  symbolic  force,  which  in  the  urban  Late  periods 
rise  to  prepotency  in  the  shapes  of  economy  and  science.  In  these  two  being- 
streams  the  ideas  of  Destiny  and  Causality  are  thought  out  to  their  limit, 
unrelentingly  and  anti-traditionally.  Forces  emerge  which  are  separated 
by  a deadly  enmity  from  the  old  class-ideals  of  heroism  and  saintliness  — these 
forces  are  money  and  intellect ^ and  they  are  related  to  those  ideals  as  the  city  to 
the  country.  Henceforward  property  is  called  riches,  and  world-outlook  knowl- 
edge — a desanctified  Destiny  and  a profane  Causality.  But  science  is  in  con- 
tradiction with  Nobility  too,  for  this  does  not  prove  or  investigate,  but  is. 
**De  omnibus  dubitandum"*  is  the  attitude  of  a burgher  and  not  of  an  aristocrat, 
while  at  the  same  time  it  contradicts  the  basic  feeling  of  priesthood,  for  which 
the  proper  role  of  critique  is  that  of  a handmaid.  Economy,  too,  finds  an 
enemy  here,  in  the  shape  of  the  ascetic  moral  which  rejects  money-getting, 
just  as  the  genuine  land-based  nobility  despises  it.  Even  the  old  inerchant- 
nobility  has  in  many  cases  perished  (e.g.,  Hanse  Towns,  Venice,  Genoa), 
because  with  its  traditions  it  could  not  and  would  not  fall  in  with  the  business 
outlook  of  the  big  city.  And,  with  all  this,  economy  and  science  are  themselves 


348' ■ THE^  DECLINE  OF.  THE  WEST 

at  enmity;  once  mote,  in  the  conflicts  of  money-getting  and  knowledge,  between 
caunting-house  anA  study y business  liberalism  and  doctrinaire  liberalism,  we  meet 
the  old  great  oppositions  of  action  and  contemplation,  castle  and  cathedral. 
In  one  form  or  in  another  this  order  of  things  emerges  in  the  structure  of  every 
Culture  — hence  the  possibility  of  a comparative  morphology  in  the  social 
as  in  the  other  aspects  of  history. 

Wholly  outside  the  category  of  the  true  Estates  ate  the  calling-classes  of 
the  craftsmen,  ofEcials,  artists,  and  labourers,  whose  organization  in  guilds 
(e.g.,  of  smiths  in  China,  of  scribes  in  Egypt,  and  of  singers  in  the  Classical 
world)  dates  from  pristine  antiquity,  an4  who  because  of  their  professional 
segregation  (which  sometimes  goes  .as  far  as  to  cut  off  their  cmmbium  with 
others)  actually  develop  into  genuine  tribes,  as,  for  instance,  the  Faiasha  ^ 
of  Abyssinia  and  some  of  the  Sudra  classes  named  in  Manu*s  code.  Their  sepa- 
ration is  due  merely  to  their  technical  accomplishments  and  therefore  not,  to 
their  being  vessels  of  the  symbolism  of  Time  and  Space.  Their  tradition,  like- 
wise, is  limited  to  their  techniques  and  does  not  refer  to  a customary-ethic  or 
a moral  of  their  own^  such  as  is  always  found  in  economy  and  science  as  such. 
As  derived  from  a nobility,  judges  and  officers  are  classes,  whereas  officials 
are  a profession;  as  derived  from  priesthood,  scholars  are  a class,  while  artists 
are  a profession.  Sense  of  honour,  conscience,  adhere  in  one  case  to  the  status, 
in  the  other  to  the  achievement-  .There  is  something,  slight  though  it  may  be, 
of  symbolism  in  every  category  on  the  one  side,  and  none  in  any  category  on  the 
other.  And  consequently  something  of  strangeness,  irregularity,  often  disgrace, 
clings  to  them  — consider,  for  example,  executioners,  actors,  and  strolling 
singers,  or  the  Classical  estimation  of  the  artist.  Their  classes  or  guilds  separate 
from  general  society,  or  seek  the  protection  of  other  orders  of  society  (or  in- 
dividual patrons  and  Maecenases),  but  fit  themselves  in  with  that  society  they 
cannot,  and  their  inability  to  do  so  finds  expression  in  the  guild-wars  of  the 
old  cities  and  in  uncouthness  of  every  sort  in  the  instincts  and  manners  of  artists. 

V . ■ 

A history  of  estates  or  classes,  ignoring  in  principle  that  of  profession- 
classes,  is  therefore  a presentation  of  the  metaphysical  element  in  higher  man- 
kind, so  far  as  this  rises  to  grand  symbolism  in  species  of  onflowing  life,  species 
in  and  along  which  the  history  of  the  Cultures  moves  to  fulfilment. 

At  the  very  beginning,  the  sharply  defined  type  of  the  peasant  is  something 
new.  In  Carolingian  times,  and  under,  the  Tsarist  system  of  the  ‘‘Mir*’  in 
Russia,^  there  were  freemen  and  hinds  cultivating  the  soil,  but  no  peasantry. 

^ Black  Jews,  who  are  smiths  to  a man. 

2 The  genuinely  primitive  Mir,  contrary  to  the  assertions  of  enthusiastic  socialists  and  pan- 
slavists,  dates  only  from  after  1600,  and  has  been  abolished  since  1861.  Here  the  soil  is  communal  soil, 
and  the  villagers  arc  as  far  as  possible  held  fast,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  tilling  of  this  soil  shall 
cover  the  demands  of  taxation. 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  ' 349 

Only  when  there  emerges  the  feeling  of  being  different  from  the  two  symbolic 
**  lives’ ' — Freidanlc's  Bescheidmheit'^  comes  into  our  minds  — does  this  life 
become  an  Estate,  the  mMmhmgtst2Lte  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word,  the  root 
of  the  great  plant  Culture,  which  has  driven  its  fibres  deep  into  Mother  Earth 
and  darkly,  industriously,  draws  all  juices  into  itself  and  sends  them  to  the  upper 
parts,  where  trunks  and  branches  tower  up  in  the  light  of  history.  It  serves 
the  great  lives  not  merely  by  the  nourishment  that  it  wins  out  of  the  soil  for 
them,  but  also  with  that  other  harvest  of  mother  earth  — its  own  blood;  for 
blood  flowed  up  for  centuries  from  the  villages  into  the  high  places,  received 
there  the  high  forms,  and  maintained  the  high  lives.  The  relation  is  called 
(from  the  noble’s  point  of  view)  vassalage^  and  we  find  it  arising  — whatever 
the  superficial  causes  may  be  in  each  case  — in  the  West  between  looo  and 
1400  and  in  the  other  Cultures  at  the  ‘‘contemporary”  periods.  The  Helotry 
of  Sparta  belongs  with  it,  and  equally  so  the  old  ^omm.  clientsla^  from  which 
after  471  the  rural  Plebs  — that  is,  a free  yeomanry  — grew  up.^  Astonishing 
indeed  is  the  force  of  this  striving  towards  symbolic  form  in  the  Pseudomorphosis 
of  the  Late  Roman  East,  where  the  caste  system  of  the  principate  founded  by 
Augustus  (with  its  division  into  senatorial  and  equestrian  ofScialdom)  evolved 
backwards  until,  about  300,  it  had  returned,  wherever  the  Magian  world- 
feeling prevailed,  to  a condition  parallel  to  that  of  the  Gothic  in  1300  — the 
condition,  in  fact,  of  the  Sassanid  Empire  of  its  own  time.®  Out  of  the  official- 
dom of  a highly  Civilized  administration  came  a minor  nobility  of  decurions, 
village  knights,  and  town  politicians,  who  were  responsible  to  the  sovereign 
in  body  and  goods  for  all  outgoings  — a feudalism  formed  backwards  — and 
gradually  made  their  positions  heritable,  just  as  happened  under  the  Egyptian 
Vth  dynasty  and  the  first  Ch6u  centuries^  and  the  Europe  of  the  Crusades. 
Military  status,  of  officers  and  soldiers  alike,  became  hereditary  in  the  same 
way,®  and  service  as  a feudal  obligation,  and  all  the  rest  of  what  Diocletian 
presently  reduced  to  formal  law.  The  individual  was  firmly  bound  to  the  status 
(corpori  ddnems)^  and  the  principle  was  extended  as  compulsory  guild-member- 
ship to  ail  trades,  as  in  the  Gothic  or  in  old  Egypt.  But,  above  all,  there  neces- 
sarily arose  from  the  ruins  of  the  Late  Classical  slave-economy  of  “Latifundia”  ® 
the  colonate  of  hereditary  small  farmers,  while  the  great  estates  became  ad- 
ministrative districts  and  the  lord  was  made  responsible  for  its  taxes  and  its 

^ See  'Ency,  BriL,  XI  ed.,  Vol.  XI,  pp.  94,  786,  or  any  histories  of  German  literature.  — Tr. 

® See,  farther,  below. 

^ Brentano,  By^anf.  Volkswktschaft  p.  15. 

^ Even  I-wang  C934-"909)  was  obliged  to  leave  conquered  territories  to  his  vassals,  who  put  in 
counts  and  reevds  of  their  own  choice. 

® See  H.  Delbriick,  Gesch.  der  Kriegskunst,  Vol.  II,  Book  I,  Ch.  x;  or  C.  W.  C.  Oman,  Art  cfWar: 
MiddU  Ages,  Ch.  i.  — Tr. 

® The  slave  in  the  Classical  sense  disappears  automatically  and  completely  in  these  centuries  — 
one  of  the  most  significant  indications  that  the  Qassical  world-feeling,  and  with  it  its  economic 
feeling,  were  extinct. 


350^^^^^  : THE  DECLINE-  OF  THE  WEST 

recruit-quota.^  Between  150,  and  300’ the  “colonus’'  became  legally  bound  to 
the  soil  C^dscriptfds  gleba).  And  with  that  the  difFercntiation  of  feudal  lord  and 
vassal  was  reached. 

Every  new  Culture  has  potentially  its  nobility  and  its  priesthood.  The 
apparent  exceptions  to  this  are  due  merely  to  the  absence  to  tangible  tradition. 
We  know  to-day  that  a real  priesthood  existed  in  ancient  China  ^ and  we  may 
assume  as  self-evident  that  there  was  a priest-estate  in  the  beginnings  of  Orpbism 
in  the  eleventh  century  b.c.  — the  more  confidently  as  we  have  plain  indications 
of  it  in  the  epic  figures  of  Calchas  and  Tiresias.  Similarly  the  development  of 
the  feudal  constitution  in  Egypt  presupposes  a primitive  nobility  as  early  as  the 
Illrd  Dynasty.^  But  the  form  in  which,  and  the  force  with  which,  these  Es- 
tates first  realized  themselves  and  then  took  ch^Crge  of  the  course  of  history  — 
shaped  it,  carried  it,  and  even  represented  it  in  their  own  destinies  — • depend 
upon  the  Prime-symbol  on  which  each  individual  Culture,  with  its  entire  form- 
language,  is  based. 

The  nobility,  wholly  plantlike,  proceeds  everywhere  from  the  land,  which 
is  its  primary  property  and  with  which  it  is  fast  bound.  It  possesses  everywhere 
the  basic  form  of  the  family,  the  gens  (in  which,  therefore,  the  “other’'  gender 
of  history,  the  feminine,  is  expressed  also),  and  it  manifests  itself  through  the 
will-to-duration  — duration,  namely,  of  the  blood  — as  the  great  symbol  of 
Time  and  History.  It  will  appear  that  the  early  officialdom  of  the  vassal  state, 
based  on  personal  trustworthiness,  everywhere  — in  China  and  Egypt,  in  the 
Classical  and  the  Western  World  — ^ goes  through  the  same  development,  first 
creating  quasi-feudal  court  offices  and  dignities,  then  seeking  hereditary  con- 
nexion with  the  soil,  and  so  finally  becoming  the  origin  of  noble  family-lines. 

The  Faustian  will-to-infinity  comes  to  expression  in  the  genealogical  principle, 
which  — strange  as  it  may  seem  — is  peculiar  to  this  Culture.  And  in  this 
Culture,  moreover,  it  intimately  permeates  and  moulds  all  the  historical  forms, 
and  supremely  those  of  the  states  themselves.  The  historical  sense  that  insists 
upon  getting  to  know  the  destinies  of  its  own  blood  backwards  through  the 
centuries  and  seeing  archival  proofs  of  dates  and  provenances  up  to  the  first 

^ Thus,  later,  under  Justinian,  Belisarius  could  furnish  seven  thousand  cavalry  from  his  own 
domains  for  the  Gothic  War.  Very  few  German  princes  could  have  done  so  much  in  Charles  V's 
time.  [The  last  of  such  armies  in  Western  history  was  the  army  of  the  House  of  Conde  in  the 
seventeenth  century.  These  centuries  of  ours  “correspond”  with  the  period  that  set  in  with  Jus- 
tinian. — Tr.] 

® Pohlmann,  Kom.  Kaiser^pit  (Pflugk-Harttungs  Wdtgesch.^  I,  pp.  100,  et  seq.). 

3 Sec  p-  a86. 

^ In  spite  of  Ed.  Meyer  (Gesch.  d.  Alurtums,  I,  § Z43)- 

® Our  marshal  and  the  Chinese  sse-ma,  chamberlain  and  Chen,  high  steward  and  ta-tsai,  high 
bailiff  and  nan,  carl  and  ph  (the  Chinese  ranks  as  in  Schindler,  Das  Priesfertum  im  alien  China,  p.  61, 
et  seq.).  Precisely  corresponding  Egyptian  grades  in  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch,  des  Altertums,  I,  § aax;  By- 
zantine in  the  **Noiitia  Dignitatum**  (derived  in  part  from  the  Sassanid  Court).  In  the  Classical 
city-states  certain  official  titles  of  ancient  origin  suggest  court  functions  (Colacretx,  Prytancs, 
Consuls).  See  further  below. 


NOBILITY  AND  ■ PRIESTHOOD  35i 

ancestors;  the  careful  ordering  of  the  genealogical  tree,  which  is  potent  enough 
to  make  present  possession  and  inheritance  dependent  upon  the  fortunes  of  a 
single  marriage  contracted  perhaps  five  hundred  years  ago;  the  conceptions  of 
pMfe  bloody  birth-equivalence,  mesalliance  — all  this  is  will-to-direction  in  time, 
will  towards  Time's  remote  distances.  There  is  no  second  example  of  it,  save 
perhaps  in  the  Egyptian  nobility,  and  there  the  comparable  forms  that  were 
attained  were  far  weaker. 

Nobility  of  the  Classical  style,  on  the  contrary,  relates  to  the  present  estate 
of  the  agnatic  family,  and  from  it  straight  to  2.  mythical  origin,  which  does  not 
imply  the  historical  sense  in  the  least,  but  only  a craving,  sublimely  regardless 
of  historic  probability,  for  splendid  backgrounds  to  the  here  and  now  of  the 
living.  Only  thus  can  we  explain  the  otherwise  baffling  naivete  with  which  an 
individual  saw  behind  his  grandfather  Theseus  and  Heracles  in  one  plane,  and 
fashioned  himself  a family  tree  (or  several,  perhaps,  as  Alexander  did),  and  the 
light-heartedness  with  which  respectable  Roman  families  would  forge  the 
names  of  reputed  ancestors  into  the  old  consular  lists.  At  the  funeral  of  a 
Roman  noble  the  wax  masks  of  great  forefathers  were  introduced  into  the 
cortege,  but  it  was  only  for  the  number  and  sound  of  the  famous  names  and  not 
in  the  least  on  account  of  any  genealogical  connexion  with  the  present.  This 
trait  appears  throughout  the  Classical  nobility,  which  like  the  Gothic  formed, 
structurally  and  spiritually,  one  inward  unit  from  Etruria  to  Asia  Minor.  On  it 
rested  the  power  that,  even  at  the  beginning  of  the  Late  period,  was  still  in 
the  possession  of  order-like  family-groupings  throughout  the  cities  (phylas, 
phratrim,  tribus,  and  what  not)  which  maintained  a purely  present  membership 
and  unity  by  means  of  sacral  forms  — for  example,  the  three  Doric  and  the  four 
Ionic  phyl^e,  and  the  three' Etruscan  tribes  that  appear  in  the  earlier  Roman  his- 
tory as  Tities,  Ramnes,  and  Luceres.  In  the  Vedas  the  “father-”  and  the 
“ mother-”souls  had  claims  to  soul-rites  only  in  respect  of  three  nearer  and  three 
further  generations,^  after  which  the  past  claimed  them;  and  nowhere  do  we 
find  the  Classical  cult  of  souls  reaching  any  further  back  than  the  Indian.  It  is 
the  very  reverse  of  the  ancestor-worship  of  the  Chinese  and  the  Egyptians, 
which  was  by  hypothesis  without  end,  and  therefore  maintained  the  family  in 
a definite  ordering  even  beyond  bodily  death.  In  China  there  still  lives  to-day 
a duke,  K’ung,  who  is  the  descendant  of  Confucius  and  equally  the  descendant 
of  Lao-tse,  of  Chang-lu,  and  others.  It  is  not  a question  of  a many-branched 
tree,  but  of  carrying  the  line,  the  tao  of  being,  straight  on  — if  necessary,  frankly 
by  adoption  (the  adopted  member,  pledged  to  the  ancestor-cult,  is  thereby 
spiritually  incorporated  in  the  family)  or  other  expedients. 

An  unbridled  joy  of  life  streams  through  the  flourishing  centuries  of  this 
esta;te,  the  Estate  far  excelUncey  which  is  direction  and  destiny  and  race  through 
and  through.  Love,  because  woman  is  history,  and  war  because  fighting  makes 
^ Hardy,  Indische  Hfiligionsgesch,,  p.  2.60. 


35i  : ^ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

history,  are  the  acknowledged  foci  of  its  thoughts  and  feelings.  The  Northern 
skald-poetry  and  the  Southern  correspond  to  the  old  love-songs  of 

the  Chinese  age  of  chivalry  in  the  Shi-King,^  which  were  sung  in  the  Pi- Yung, 
the  places  of  noble  training  (hiao).  And  the  ceremonial  public  archery-displays, 
like  the  Early  Classical  agon,  and  the  Gothic  and  the  Persian-Byzantine  ^ 
tourney,  were  manifestations  of  the  life  on  its  Homeric  side. 

In  opposition  to  this  side  stands  the  Orphk  — the  expression  of  the  space- 
experience  of  a Culture  through  the  style  of  its  priesthood.  It  was  in  accord 
with  the  Euclidean  character  of  Classical  extension  — which  needed  no  inter- 
mediaries for  intercourse  with  near  and  corporeal  gods  — that  in  this  case 
priesthood,  from  beginnings  as  an  estate,  rapidly  degenerated  into  city-official- 
dom. Similarly,  it  was  expressive  of  the  Chinese  tao  that  the  place  of  the 
original  hereditary  priesthood  came  to  be  taken  by  professional  classes  of  pray- 
ing men,  scribes,  and  oracle-priests,  who  could  accompany  the  religious  per- 
formances of  the  authorities  and  heads  of  families  with  the  prescribed  rites. 
It  was  in  conformity,  again,  with  the  Indian  world-feeling  that  lost  itself  in 
measureless  infinity  that  the  priest-class  there  became  a second  nobility,  which 
with  immense  power,  intruding  upon  every  sort  of  life,  planted  itself  between 
the  people  and  its  wilderness  of  gods.  It  is  an  expression,  lastly,  of  the  cavern” 
feeling  that  the  priest  of  trueMagian  cast  is  the  monk  and  the  hermit,  and  be- 
comes more  and  more  so,  while  the  secular  clergy  steadily  loses  in  symbolic 
significance. 

In  contrast  to  all  these  there  is  the  Faustian  priesthood,  which,  still  without 
any  profound  import  or  dignity  in  900,  rose  up  thereafter  to  that  sublime  role 
of  intermediary  which  placed  it  in  principle  between  humanity  (all  humanity) 
and  a macrocosm  strained  to  all  imaginable  expanse  by  the  Faustian  passion 
of  the  third  dimension.  Excluded  from  history  by  celibacy  and  from  time  by  its 
character  indelebilis^  it  culminated  in  the  Papacy,  which  represented  the  highest 
symbol  of  God’s  dynamic  Space  that  it  was  possible  to  conceive;  even  the  Prot- 
estant idea  of  a generalized  priesthood  has  not  destroyed  it,  but  merely  de- 
centralized it  from  one  point  and  one  person  into  the  heart  of  each  individual 
believer. 

The  contradiction  between  being  and  waking-being  that  exists  in  every 
microcosm  necessarily  drives  the  two  Estates  against  one  another.  Time 
seeks  to  absorb  and  subordinate  Space,  Space  Time.  Spiritual  and  worldly 
power  are  magnitudes  so  different  in  structure  and  tendency  that  any  reconcili- 
ation, or  even  understanding,  between  them  seems  impossible.  But  this  conflict 
has  not  in  all  Cultures  come  to  world-historical  expression.  In  China  it  pro- 
moted the  tac  idea  that  primacy  should  reside  securely  in  an  aristocracy.  In 

^ M.  Granet,  Coutumes  matrimoniales  de  la  Chine  antique^  T'oung  Fao  (1912.),  pp.  517,  et  seq. 

2 The  tournament  was  an  institution  in  the  other,  western,  haif  of  the  Magian  world  as 
well.  — Tr. 


NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  ' ■ 333 

India  the  conception  of  Space  as  infinite-indefinite  required  a primacy  of  the 
priesthood.  In  the  Arabian  Culture  the  Magian  world-feeling  involved  in 
principle  the  inclusion  of  the  worldly  visible  society  of  believers  as  a constituent 
in  the  grand  consensus,  and  therefore  the  unity  of  spiritual  and  temporal  polity, 
law,  and  sovereignty.  Not  that  there  was  not  friction  between  the  two  estates; 
far  from  it;  in  the  Sassanid  Empire  there  were  bloody*feuds  between  the  country 
aristocracy  of  the  Dikhans  and  the  party  of  the  Magi  — even  in  some  instances 
murders  of  sovereigns  — and  in  Byzantium  the  whole  fifth  century  is  full  of 
the  struggles  between  the  Imperial  power  and  the  clergy,  which  form  an  ever- 
present background  to  the  Monophysite  and  Nestorian  controversies.^  But 
the  basic  interconnexion  of  the  two  orders  was  not  in  dispute. 

In  the  Classical  world,  which  abhorred  the  infinite  in  every  sense.  Time  was 
reduced  to  the  present  and  Extension  to  tangible  unit-bodies;  as  the  result,  the 
grand  symbolic  estates  became  so  voided  of  meaning  that,  as  compared  with  the 
city-state,  which  expressed  the  Classical  prime-symbol  in  the  strongest  imagi- 
nable form,  they  did  not  count  as  independent  forces  at  all.  In  the  history  of 
Egyptian  mankind,  on  the  other  hand,  which  is  the  history  of  striving  with 
equal  force  towards  distances  of  time  and  of  space,  the  struggle  of  the  two 
estates  and  their  symbolisms  is  constantly  recognizable  right  into  the  period  of 
complete  fellahdom.  For  the  transition  from  the  IVth  to  the  Vth  Dynasty  is 
accompanied  also  by  a visible  triumph  of  the  priestly  over  the  knightly  world- 
feeling; the  Pharaoh,  from  being  the  body  and  vessel  of  the  supreme  deity, 
becomes  its  servant,  and  the  Re  sanctuary  overpowers  the  tomb-temple  of  the 
ruler  both  in  architectural  and  in  suggestive  force.  The  New  Empire  witnessed, 
immediately  after  its  great  Cassars,  the  political  autocracy  of  the  Amen  priest- 
hood, Thebes,  and  then  again  the  revolution  of  the  “heretic”  king  Ameno- 
phis  IV  (Akhenaton)  — in  which  one  feels  unmistakably  a political  as  well  as 
a religious  side  — and  so  on  until  after  interminable  conflicts  between  warrior- 
and  priestly-castes,  the  Egyptian  world  ended  in  foreign  domination. 

In  the  Faustian  Culture  this  battle  between  two  high  symbols  of  equal  force 
has  been  waged  in  somewhat  the  same  spirit,  but  with  far.  greater  passion  still 
than  in  the  Egyptian  — so  that,  from  the  early  Gothic  onward,  only  armistice, 
never  peace,  has  seemed  possible  between  State  and  Church.  But  in  this  conflict 
the  handicap  against  waking-being  tdls  — it  would  shake  off  its  dependence 
upon  being,  but  it  cannot.  The  mind  needs  the  blood,  but  the  blood  does  not 
need  the  mind.  War  belongs  to  the  world  of  time  and  history  — intellectual 
battle  is  only  a fight  with  reasons^  only  disputation  — and,  therefore  a militant 
Church  must  step  from  the  world  of  truths  into  the  world  of  facts  — from  the 
world  of  Jesus  into  that  of  Pilate.  And  so  it  becomes  an  element  in  race-history 
and  subject  to  the  formative  powers  of  the  political  side  of  life.  From  early  Feu- 
dalism to  modern  Democracy  it  fights  with  sword  and  cannon,  poison  and  dagger,. 

^ The  life  of  John  Ghtysostom  is  an  instance. 


354  V ' the  decline  of  THE  WEST' 

bribery  and  treason,  all  the  weapons  of  party  conflict  in  use  at  the  time.  It  sacri- 
fices articles  of  belief  to  worldly  advantages,  and  allies  itself  with  heretics  and 
unbelievers  against  orthodox  powers.  The  Papacy  as  an  idea  has  a history  of  its 
own,  but  this  bears  no  relation  to  the  position  of  the  popes  in  the  sixth  and  sev- 
enth centuries  as  Byzantine  viceroys  of  Syrian  and  Greek  provenance;  or  to  their 
later  evolution  into  powerful  landowners,  with  crowds  of  subject  peasants;  qr  to 
. the  Patrimonium  Petri  of  the  early  Gothic  — a sort  of  duchy  in  the  possession  of 
great  families  of  the  Campagna  (Colonna,  Orsini,  Savelli,  Frangipani),  which 
alternately  set  up  the  popes,  until  finally  the  general  Western  feudalism  pre- 
vailed here  also,  and  the  Holy  See  came  to  be  an  object  of  investiture  within  the 
families  of  the  Roman  baronage,  so  that  each  new  pope,  like  a German  or  a 
French  king,  had  to  confirm  the  rights  of  his  vassals.  In  103Z  the  Counts  of 
Tusculum  nominated  a twelve-year-old  boy  as  pope.  In  those  days  eight  hun- 
dred castle-towers  stood  up  in  the  city  area  of  Rome  amongst  and  upon  the 
Classical  ruins.  In  1045  three  popes  entrenched  themselves  in  the  Vatican,  the 
Lateran,  and  Santa  Maria  Maggiore  respectively,  and  were  defended  by  their 
noble  supporters. 

Now  supervened  the  city  with  its  own  soul,  first  emancipating  itself  from 
the  soul  of  the  countryside,  then  setting  up  as  an  equal  to  it,  and  finally  seeking 
to  suppress  and  extinguish  it.  But  this  evolution  accomplished  itself  in  kinds 
of  lifoy  and  it  also,  therefore,  is  part  of  the  history  of  the  estates.  The  citj4ife 
as  such  emerges  — through  the  inhabitants  of  these  small  settlements  acquiring 
a conimon  soul,  and  becoming  conscious  that  the  life  within  is  sohiething 
different  from  the  life  outside  — and  at  once  the  spell  of  prsonal  freedom  begins 
to  operate  and  to  attract  within  the  walls  life-streams  of  more  and  more  new 
kinds.  There  sets  in  a sort  of  passion  for  becoming  urban  and  for  propagating 
urban  life.  It  is  this,  and  not  material  considerations,  that  produced  the  fever 
of  the  colonization  period  in  the  Classical  world,  which  is  still  recognizable  to 
us  in  its  last  offshoots,  and  which  it  is  not  quite  exact  to  speak  of  as  colonization 
at  all.  For  it  was  a creative  enthusiasm  in  the  man  of  the  city  that  from  the 
tenth  century  b.g.  (and  ‘‘contemporaneously”  in  other  Cultures)  drew  genera- 
tion after  generation  under  the  spell  of  a new  life,  with  which  there  emerges  for 
the  first  time  in  human  history  the  idea  of  freedom.  This  idea  is  not  of  political 
(still  less  of  abstract)  origin,  but  is  something  bringing  to  expression  the  fact 
that  within  the  city  walls  plantlike  attachment  to  a soil  has  ceased,  and  that 
the  threads  that  run  through  the  whole  life  of  the  countryside  have  been 
snapped.  And  consequently  the  freedom-idea  ever  contains  a negative;  it 
looses,  redeems,  defends,  always  frees  2,  mm  from  something.  Of  this  freedom 
the  city  is  the  expression;  the  city-spirit  is  understanding  become  free,  and 
everything  in  the  way  of  intellectual,  social,  and  national  movements  that 
bursts  forth  in  Late  periods  under  the  name  of  Freedom  leads  back  to  an  origin 
in  this  one  prime  fact  of  detachment  form  the  land. 


: NOBILITY  AND  PRIESTHOOD  ■ ' ' : 355  ' 

But  the  city  is  older  than  the  “citizen.”  It  attracts  first  the  calling-c! asses, 
which  as  such  are  outside  the  symbolic  estates,  and,  when  urban,  take  form  as 
guilds.  Then  it  draws  in  the  primary  estates  themselves;  the  minor  nobility 
moves  its  castles,  the  Franciscans  their  cloisters,  within  the  contour.  As  yet, 
not  much  is  inwardly  altered.  Not  only  Papal  Rome,  but  all  Italian  cities  of 
this  time  arc  filled  with  the  fortified  towers  of  the  families,  who  issued  thence 
to  fight  out  their  feuds  in  the  streets.  In  a well-known  fourteenth-century 
picture  of  Siena  these  towers  stand  up  like  factory  chimneys  round  the  market- 
place.^ As  for  the  Florentine  palace  of  the  Renaissance,  if,  in  respect  of  the 
bright  life  within,  it  is  the  successor  of  Provencal  courts,  it  is  equally,  with  its 
“rusticated”  fagade,  an  offshoot  of  the  Gothic  castles  that  the  French  and 
German  knights  were  still  building  on  their  hills.  It  was,  in  fact,  only  slowly 
that  the  new  life  separated  out.  Between  1150  and  1450,  throughout  the  West, 
the  immigrant  families  concentrated,  vis-h-vis  the  guilds,  into  the  patriciate, 
and  in  so  doing  detached  themselves,  spiritually  as  in  other  respects,  from  the 
country  nobility.  It  was  exactly  the  same  in  early  China,  Egypt,  and  the 
Byzantine  Empire,  and  it  is  only  in  the  light  of  this  that  we  become  able  to 
understand  the  older  Classical  city-leagues  (such  as  the  Etruscan  and,  it  may  be, 
even  the  Latin)  and  the  sacral  connexions  of  colonial  daughter-cities  with  their 
mother  city.  It  was  not  the  Polls  as  such,  so  far,  that  was  the  backbone  of 
events,  but  the  patriciate  of  phyte  and  phratrias  within  it.  The  original  Polls  is 
identical  with  the  nobility^  as  Rome  was  up  to  471,  and  Sparta  and  the  Etruscan 
cities  throughout,  Synoecism  grew  out  of  it,  and  the  city-state  was  formed  by 
it.  But  here,  as  in  other  •Cultures,  the  difference  between  country-  and  city- 
nobility  was  at  first  quite  unimportant  as  compared  with  the  strong  and  deep 
distinction  between  the  nobility  (in  general)  and  the  residue. 

The  burgher  proper  emerges  when  the  fundamental  distinction  between 
town  and  country  has  brought  the  “families  and  the  guilds,”  in  spite  of  their 
otherwise  implacable  hostility  to  one  another,  to  a sense  of  unity  vis-h-vis  the 
old  nobility,  the  feudal  system  generally,  and  the  feudal  position  of  the  Church. 
The  notion  of  the  “Third  Estate”  (to  use  the  catchword  of  1789)  is  essentially 
only  a unit  of  crntradiction^  incapable  of  definition  by  positive  content,  and  hav- 
ing neither  customary-ethic  of  its  own  — for  the  higher  bourgeois  society  took 
after  the  nobility,  and  the  urban  piety  after  the  older  priesthood  — nor  symbol- 
ism of  its  own  — for  the  idea  that  life  was  not  for  the  service  of  practical  aims, 
but  for  the  consistent  ^expression  of  a symbolism  of  Time  and  Space,  and  could 
claim  true  dignity  only  to  the  extent  that  it  was  the  worthy  vessel  of  these," 
was  necessarily  repugnant  to  the  urban  reason  as  such.  This  reason,  which 
dominates  the  entire  political  literature  of  the  Late  period,  asserts  a new  group- 
ing of  estates  as  from  the  rise  of  cities  — at  first  only  in  theory,  but  finally, 

^ Another  example  (beloved  of  artists)  stands  to  this  day  in  the  town  of  San  Gimigniano,  which 
is  almost  nothing  but  a group  of  family  towers  ranging  up  to  150  ft.  in  height.  — Tr. 


356  : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

whea:  rationalisHi  becomes  omnipotent,  in  practice,  even  the  bloody  practice  of 
revolutions.  Nobility  and  clergy,  so  far  as  they  are  still  extant,  appear  rather 
markedly  as  pivihged  classes,  the  tacit  significance  of  the  emphasis  being  that 
their  claim  to  prescriptive  rights  on  the  ground  of  historical  status  is  (from  the 
point  of  view  of  timeless  rational  or  ‘maturaF*  law)  obsolete  nGnsense,  They 
now  have  their  centre  in  the  captd  city  (this  also  a Late-period  idea)  and  now, 
and  now  only,  develop  aristocratic  forms  to  that  imposing  combination  of 
hauteur  and  elegance  that  we  see,  for  example,  in  the  portraits  of  Reynolds 
and  Lawrence.  In  opposition  to  them  stand  the  intellectual  powers  of  the  now 
supreme  city,  economy  and  science^  which  in  conjunction  with  the  mass  of  artisans, 
functionaries,  and  labourers  feel  themselves  as  a party,  diverse  in  its  constitu- 
ents, but  invariably  solid  at  the  call  to  battle  for  freedom  — that  is,  for  urban 
independence  of  the  great  old-time  symbols  and  the  rights  that  flowed  from 
them.  As  components  of  the  Third  Estate,  which  counts  by  heads  and  not  by 
rank,  they  are  all,  in  all  Late  periods  of  all  Cultures,  ‘Tiberkr*  in  one  way  or 
another  — namely,  free  from  the  inward  powers  of  non-urban  life.  Economy  is 
freed  to  make  money,  science  freed  to  criticize.  And  so  in  ail  the  great  decisions 
we  perceive  the  intellect  with  its  books  and  its  meetings  having  the  word 
(‘'Democracy**),  and  money  obtaining  the  advantages  (“Plutocracy**)  — and  it 
is  never  ideas,  but  always  capital,  that  wins.  But  this  again  is  just  the  op- 
position of  truths  and  facts,  in  the  form  in  which  it  develops  from  the  city-life. 

Moreover,  by  way  of  protest  against  the  ancient  symbols  of  the  soil-bound 
life,  the  city  opposes  to  the  aristocracy  of  birth  the  notion  of  an  aristocracy 
of  money  and  an  aristocracy  of  intellect  — the  one  not  very  explicit  as  a claim, 
but  all  the  more  effective  as  a fact;  the  other  a truth,  but  nothing  more  than 
that  and,  as  a spectacle  for  the  eye,  not  very  convincing.  In  every  Late  period 
there  grows  on  to  the  ancient  nobility  — that  in  which  some  big  bit  of  history 
(say,  Crusades,  or  Norman  conquest)  has  become  stored  as  form  and  beat,  but 
which  often  has  inwardly  decayed  at  the  great  courts  — a genuine  second  crop. 
Thus  in  the  fourth  century  b.c.  the  entry  of  great  plebeian  families  as  conscript 
into  the  Roman  Senate  of  ^atres  produced  within  the  senatorial  order  an  aris- 
tocracy of  ^*nobiks*'  — a nobility  holding  lands,  but  entitled  by  office.  In  just 
the  same  way  a nobility  of  nepotism  arose  in  Papal  Rome;  in  1650  there  were 
scarcely  fifty  families  of  more  than  three  centuries*  status.  In  the  Southern 
States  of  the  American  Union  there  grew  up,  from  Baroque  times  onward,  that 
planter-aristocracy  which  was  annihilated  by  the  money-powers  of  the  North 
"in  the  Civil  War  of  1 8 61-5 . The  old  merchant-nobility  of  the  type  of  the  Fugger , 
Welser,  and  Medici  and  the  great  Venetian  and  Genoese  houses  — to  this  type, 
too,  must  be  assigned  practically  the  whole  of  the  patriciate  of  the  Hellenic 
colonial  cities  of  800  — had  always  something  of  aristocracy  in  them,^  race, 
tradition,  high  standards,  and  the  nature-impulse  to  re-establish  connexion 
- * I ^ Ambrogio  Spiaola  is' a case  in  point.  — Tr. 


NOBILITY  AND’  PRIESTHOOD  ' 357 

with  the  soil  by  acquiring  lands  (although  the  old  family  house  in  town  was 
no  bad  substitute).  But  the  new  money-aristocracy:  of  deals  and  speculations 
rapidly  acquired  a taste  for  polite  forms  and  at  last  forced  its  way  into  the 
birth-nobility  — ■ in  Rome,  as  Equites,  from  the  first  Punic  War,  in  France 
under  Louis  XIV  ^ — which  it  disintegrated  and  corrupted,  while  the  intellec- 
tual aristocracy  of  the  Enlightenment,  for  its  part,  overwhelmed  it  with  scorn. 
The  Confucians  took  the  old  Chinese  idea  of  from  the  ethic  of  nobility  and 
put  it  into  the  virtue  of  intellect,  and  made  the  Pi- Yung,  from  a centre  of 
knightly  battle-play,  into  an  ** intellectual  wrestling-school,”  a gymnasium  — 
quite  in  the  spirit , of  our  eighteenth  century. 

With  the  close  of  the  Late  period  of  every  Culture  the  history  of  its  estates 
also  comes  to  a more  or  less  violent  end.  The  mere  desire  to  live  in  rootless 
freedom  prevails  over  the  great  imperative  Cuiture-symbols,  which  a mankind 
now  wholly  dominated  by  the  city  no  longer  comprehends  or  toierates.  Finance 
sheds  every  trace  of  feeling  for  earth-bound  immovable  values,  and  scientific 
criticism  every  residue  of  piety.  Another  such  victory  also,  in  a measure,  is  the 
liberation  of  the  peasant,  which  consists  in  relieving  him  from  the  pressure  of 
servage,  but  hands  him  over  to  the  power  of  money,  which  now  proceeds  to 
turn  the  land  into  movable  property — which  happened  in  our  case  in  the 
eighteenth  century;  in  Byzantium  about  740  under  the  Nomos  Georgikos  of 
the  legislator  Leo  III  ^ (after  which  the  colonate  slowly  disappeared);  in  Rome 
along  with  the  founding  of  the  Plebeian  order  in  471.  In  Sparta  the  simul- 
taneous attempt  of  Pausanias  to  emancipate  the  Helots  failed. 

This  Mebs  is  the  Third  Estate  in  the  form  in  which  it  is  constitutionally  recognised 
as  a ''unit; : its  representatives  are  the  Tribunes,  not  officials,  but  trusted  persons 
armed  with  a guaranteed  immunity.  The  reform  of  471 which  inter  alia  replaced 
the  old  three  Etruscan  tribes  by  four  urban  tribes  or  wards  (a  highly  suggestive 
fact  in  itself),  has  been  variously  regarded  as  a pure  emancipation  of  peasantry  ^ 
or  as  an  organization  of  the  trading  class.^  But  the  Piebs,  as  Third  Estate,  as 
residue,  is  only  susceptible  of  negative  definition  — as  meaning  everyone  who 
does  not  belong  to  the  land-nobiiity  or  is  not  the  incumbent  of  a great  priestly 
office.  The  picture  is  as  variegated  as  that  of  the  French  **  Tiers  Etaf'  of  1789. 
Only  the  protest  holds  it  together.  In  it  are  traders,  craftsmen,  day-labourers, 
clerks.  The  gens  of  the  Claudii  contained  patrician  and  plebeian  families  — 
that  is,  great  landlords  and  prosperous  yeomen  (for  example,  the  Claudii 
Marcelli).  The  Piebs  in  the  Classical  city-state  is  what  a combination  of 
peasant  and  burgher  is  in  a Baroque  state  of  the  West,  when  it  protests  in  an 

^ The  memoirs  of  the  Due  de  Saint  Simon  give  a vivid  picture  of  this  evolution. 

2 P.  75. 

^ Corresponding  to  our  seventeenth  centuty. 

^ iC.  J.  Neumann,  D/V  Grundherrschaft  der  romisehm  Repuhlik  Qiyoo);  Ed.  Meyer,  KJ.  Schriften^ 
pp.  351,  et.  seq. 

® A.  Rosenberg,  Studim  %ut  EnPsuhung  dir  Fkhs^  Hcrm.  XLVIII  (1913),  pp-  359>  et  seq. 


358  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

assembled  states'-generai  against  the  autocracy  of  a prince.  Outside  politics  — 
that  is,  socially  — the  plebs,  as  a unit  distinguished  from  nobility  and  priest- 
hood, has  no  existence,  but  falls  apart  at  once  into  special  callings  that  are 
perfectly  distinct  in  interests.  It  is  a Party,  and  what  it  stands  for  as  such  is 
freedom  in  the  urban  sense  of  the  word.  The  fact  emerges  still  more  distinctly 
from  the  success  which  the  Roman  land-nobility  won  immediately  afterwards, 
in  adding  sixteen  country  tribes,  designated  by  family  names  and  unchallenge- 
ably  controlled  by  themselves,  to  the  four  urban  tribes  that  stood  for  bourgeoisie 
proper  — namely,  money  and  mind.  Not  until  the  great  social  conflict  during 
the  Samnite  wars  (contemporary  with  Alexander,  and  corresponding  exactly 
to  the  French  Revolution),  which  ended  with  the  Lex  Hortensia  of  xSy,  was  the 
status-idea  legally  abolished  and  the  history  of  the  symbolic  Estates  closed. 
Th  Pkbs  became  the  Pofulus  Pomanus  in  the  same  way  as  in  1789  the  “ Tiers  Etaf 
constituted  itself  the  Nation.  From  this  point  on,  in  every  Culture,  it  is  some- 
thing fundamentally  different  that  happens  under  the  label  of  social  conflict. 

The  nobility  of  every  Springtime  had  been  the  Estate  in  the  most  primary 
sense,  history  become  flesh,  race  at  highest  potential.  The  priesthood  was  its 
cmntef-t^t2Xt,  saying  no  wherever  nobility  said  yes  and  thus  displaying  the 
other  side  of  life  in  a grand  symbol. 

The  Third  Estate,  without  proper  inward  unity,  was  the  non-estate  — the 
protest,  in  estate-form,  against  the  existence  of  estates;  not  against  this  or 
that  estate,  but  against  the  symbolic  view  of  life  in  general.  It  rejects  all 
differences  not  justified  by  reason  or  practically  useful.  And  yet  it  does  mean 
something  itself,  and  means  it  very  distinctly  — the  city-life  as  estate  in  contra- 
distinction to  that  of  the  country,  freedom  as  a condition  in  contrast  to  attachment. 
But,  looked  at  from  within  its  own  field,  it  is  by  no  means  the  unclassified  residue 
that  it  appears  in  the  eyes  of  the  primary  estates.  The  bourgeoisie  has  definite 
limits;  it  belongs  to  the  Culture;  it  embraces,  in  the  best  sense,  all  who  adhere  to 
it,  and  under  the  name  of  people,  -fopulus,  demos,  rallies  nobility  and  priesthood, 
money  and  mind,  craftsman  and  wage-earner,  as  constituents  of  itself. 

This  is  the  idea  that  Civilization  finds  prevailing  when  it  comes  on  the 
scene,  and  this  is  what  it  destroys  by  its  notion  of  the  Fourth  Estate,  the  Mass, 
which  rejects  the  Culture  and  its  matured  forms,  lock,  stock,  and  barrel.  It  is 
the  absolute  of  formlessness,  persecuting  with  its  hate  every  sort  of  form,  every 
distinction  of  rank,  the  orderliness  of  property,  the  orderliness  of  knowledge. 
It  is  the  new  nomadism  of  the  Cosmopolis,^  for  which  slaves  and  barbarians  in 
the  Classical  world,  Sudras  in  the  Indian,  and  in  general  anything  and  every- 
thing that  is  merely  human,  provide  an  undifferentiated  floating  something 
that  falls  apart  the  moment  it  is  born,  that  recognizes  no  past  and  possesses  no 
future.  Thus  the  Fourth  Estate  becomes  the  expression  of  the  passing  of  a 
history  over  into  the  historyless.  The  mass  is  the  end,  the  radical  nullity. 

^ Pp.  lox,  et  seq. 


CHAPTER  XI 

THE  STATE 

(B) 

STATE  AND  HISTORY 


CHAPTER  XI 


THE  STATE 

(B) 

STATE  AND  HISTORY 

I 

Within  the  wofld-as-history,  in  which  we  are  so  livingly  woven  that  our  per- 
ception and  our  reason  constantly  obey  our  feelings,  the  cosmic  flowings  appear 
as  that  which  we  call  actuality,  real  life,  being-streams  in  bodily  form.  Their 
common  badge  is  Direction.  But  they  can  be  grasped  differently  according  as  it 
is  the  movement  or  the  thing  moved  that  is  looked  at.  The  former  aspect  we  call 
history  and  the  latter  family  or  stock  or  estate  or  people,  but  the  one  is  only 
possible  and  existent  through  the  other.  History  exists  only  as  the  history  of 
something.  If  we  are  referring  to  the  history  of  the  great  Cultures,  then 
nation  is  the  thing  moved.  State,  status^  means  condition,  and  we  obtain  our 
impression  of  the  State  when,  as  a Being  in  moved  Form  flows  past  us,  we  fix  in 
our  eyes  the  Form  as  such,  as  something  extended  and  timelessly  standing  fast, 
and  endrely  ignore  direction  and  Destiny.  State  is  history  regarded  as  at  the 
halt,  history  the  State  regarded  as  on  the  move.  The  State  of  actuality  is  the 
physiognomy  of  a historical  unit  of  being;  only  the  planned  State  of  the  theorist 
is  a system. 

A movement  has  form,  and  that  which  is  moved  is  form/"  or,  to  use 
another  sporting  expression,  when  it  is  “ going  all  out’’  it  is  in  perfect  condition. 
This  is  equally  true  for  a racehorse  or  a wrestler  and  for  an  army  or  a people. 
The  form  abstracted  from  the  life-stream  of  a people  is  the  “condition”  of  that 
people  with  respect  to  its  wrestle  in  and  with  history.  But  only  the  smallest 
part  of  this  can  be  got  at  and  identified  by  means  of  the  reason.  No  real  con- 
stitution, when  taken  by  itself  and  brought  down  to  paper  as  a system,  is 
complete.  The  unwritten,  the  indescribable,  the  usual,  the  felt,  the  self-evident, 
so  outweigh  everything  else  that  — though  theorists  never  see  it  — the  de- 
scription of  a state  or  its  constitutional  archives  cannot  give  us  even  the  sil- 
houette of  that  which  underlies  the  living  actuality  of  a state  as  its  essential 
form;  an  existence-unit  of  history  is  spoilt  when  we  seriously  subject  its  move- 
ment to  the  constraint  of  a written  constitution. 

The  individual  class  or  family  is  the  smallest,  the  nation  the  largest  unit  in 
the  stream  of  history.^  Primitive  peoples  .are  subject  to  a movement  that  is  not 
historical  in  the  higher  sense  — the  movement  may  be  a jog-trot  or  may  be  a 

^ See  pp,  159,  ct  seq. 

3^1 


362.:  ' ■ -THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  , 

charge,  but  it  has  no  organic  character  and  no  profound  importance.  Neverthe- 
less, these  primitive  peoples  are  in  motion  through  and  through,  to  such  an 
extent,  indeed,  as  to  seem  perfectly  formless  to  the  hasty  observer.  Fellaheen, 
on  the  contrary,  are  the  rigid  objects  of  a movement  that  comes  from  outside 
and  impinges  on  them  unmeaningly  and  fortuitously.  The  former  includes  the 
“ State'’  of  the  Mycenasan  period;  that  of  the  Thinite  period;  that  of  the  Shang 
dynasty  in  China  up  to,  say,  the  migration  to  Yin  (1400);  the  Frankish  realm 
of  Charlemagne;  the  Visigothic  Kingdom  to  Enrich;  and  Petrine  Russia  — 
state-forms  often  ample  and  efficient,  but  still  destitute  of  symbolism  and 
necessity.  To  the  latter  belong  the  Roman,  Chinese,  and  other  Imperia,  whose 
form  has  ceased  to  have  any  expressive  content  whatever. 

But  between  primitive  and  fellah  lies  the  history  of  the  great  Culture. 
A people  in  the  style  of  a Culture  — a historical  people,  that  is  — is  called  a 
Nation.  V A nation,  as  a living  and  battling  thing,  possesses  a State  not  merely 
as  a condition  of  movement,  but  also  (above  all)  as  an  idea.  The  State  in  the 
simplest  sense  of  the  term  may  be  as  old  as  free-moving  life  itself.  Swarms 
and  herds  of  even  very  lowly  animal  genera  may  have  “constitutions"  of  some 
sort  — and  those  of  the  ants,  of  the  bees,  of  many  fish,  or  migrating  birds,  of 
beavers,  have  reached  an  astounding  degree  of  perfection  — but  the  State  of 
the  grand  style  is  as  old  as  and  no  older  than  its  two  prime  Estates,  nobility 
and  priesthood.  These  emerge  with  the  Culture,  they  vanish  into  it,  their 
Destinies  are  to  a high  degree  identical.  Culture  is  the  being  of  nations  in 
State-form. 

A people  is  as  State,  a kindred  is  family,  “in  form"  — that  is,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  difference  between  political  and  cosmic  history,  public  and  private 
life,  res  fublica  md  res  frimta.  And  both,  moreover,  are  symbols  of  care.^ 
The  woman  is  world-history.  By  conceiving  and  giving  birth  she  cares  for 
the  perpetuation  of  the  blood.  The  mother  with  the  child  at  her  breast  is  the 
grand  emblem  of  cosmic  life.  Under  this  aspect,  the  life  of  man  and  woman 
is  “in  form"  as  marriage.  The  man,  however,  makes  history,  which  is  an  un- 
ending battle  for  the  preservation  of  that  other  life.  Maternal  care  is  supple- 
mented and  paralleled  by  paternal.  The  man  with  weapon  in  hand  is  the  other 
grand  emblem  of  the  will-to-duration.  A people  “in  condition"  is  originally 
a band  warriorhood,  a deep  and  intimately  felt  community  of  men  fit  for  arms. 
State  is  the  affair  of  man,  it  is  Care  for  the  preservation  of  the  whole  (including 
the  spiritual  self-preservation  called  honour  and  self-respect),  the  thwarting  of 
attacks,  the  foreseeing  of  dangers,  and,  above  all,  the  positive  aggressiveness 
which  is  natural  and  self-evident  to  every  life  that  has  begun  to  soar. 

If  all  life  were  one  uniform  being-stream,  the  words  “people,"  “state," 
“war,"  “policy,"  “constitution,"  would  never  have  been  heard  of.  But  the 

^ Pp.  170,  ct  se(|. 

2 Voi.  I,  pp.  136,  ct  scq.  — Tf, 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  ';;'  , . 

eternal  forceful  mmtj  of  life,  which  the  creative  power  of  the  Culture  elevates 
to  the  highest  intensities,  is  a fact,  and  historically  we  have  no  choice  but  to 
accept  it  as  such,  with  all  that  flows  therefrom.  Plant-life  is  only  plant-life 
in  relation  to  animal  life;  nobility  and  priesthood  reciprocally  condition  one 
another.  A people  is  only  really  such  in  relation  to  other  peoples^  and  the  substance 
of  this  actuality  comes  out  in  natural  and  ineradicable  oppositions,  in  attack 
and  defence,  hostility  and  war.  War  is  the  creator  of  all  great  things.  All  that 
is  meaningful  in  the  stream  of  life  has  emerged  through  victory  and  defeat. 

A people  shapes  history  inasmuch  as  it  is  “in  condition*’  for  the  task  of 
doing  so.  It  iivingly  experiences  an  inward  history  — which  gets  it  into  this 
“condition,”  in  which  alone  it  becomes  creative  ^ — and  an  outward  history, 
which  consists  in  this  creation.  Peoples  as  State,  then,  are  the  real  forces  of  all 
human  happening.  In  the  world-as-history  there  is  nothing  beyond  them. 
They  Destiny. 

Kes  publica^  the  public  life,  the  “sword  side”  of  human  being-currents,  is  in 
actuality  invisible.  The  alien  sees  merely  the  men  and  not  their  inner  connexion, 
for  indeed  this  resides  very  deep  in  the  stream  of  life,  and  even  there  is  felt  rather 
than  understood.  Similarly,  we  do  not  in  actuality  see  the  family,  but  only 
certain  persons,  whose  cohesion  in  a perfectly  definite  sense  we  know  and  grasp 
by  way  of  our  own  inward  experience.  But  for  each  such  mental  picture  there 
exists  a group  of  constituent  persons  who  are  bound  together  as  a life-unit  by  a 
like  constitution  of  outer  and  inner  being.  This  form  in  the  flow  of  existence 
is  called  customary  ethic  (jSitte')  when  it  arises  of  itself  in  the  beat  and  march  and 
is  unconscious  before  it  is  conscious;  and  law  (Rechi)  when  it  is  deliberately  stated 
and  put  forth  for  acceptance. 

Law  — irrespective  of  whether  its  authority  derives  from  the  feelings  and 
impulse  (unwritten  law,  customary  law,  English  “equity”)  or  has  been  ab- 
stracted by  reflection,  probed,  and  brought  into  system  as  Statute  Law  (Geset^ 
— ’ is  the  willed  form  of  Being.  The  jural  facts  that  it  embraces  are  of  the  two 
kinds,  though  both  possess  time-symbolism  — Care  in  two  modes,  prevision  and 
provision  — but,  from  the  very  difference  in  the  proportions  of  consciousness 
that  they  respectively  contain,  it  follows  that  throughout  real  history  there 
must  be  two  laws  in  opposition  — the  law  of  the  fathers,  of  tradition,  the 
inherited,  grown,  and  well-tried  law,  sacrosanct  because  immemorially  old, 
derived  from  the  experience  of  the  blood  and  therefore  dependable;  and  the 
thought  and  planned  law  of  reason,  nature,  and  broad  humanity,  the  product  of 
reflection  and  therefore  first  cousin  to  mathematics,  a law  that  may  not  be  very 
workable,  but  is  at  any  rate  “just.”  It  is  in  these  two  orders  of  law  that  the 
opposition  between  land-life  and  city-life,  life-experience  and  study-experience, 
ripens  till  it  bursts  out  in  that  revolutionary  embitterment  in  which  men  take  a 
law  instead  of  being  given  it,  and  break  a law  that  will  not  yield. 

A law  that  has  been  laid  down  by  a community  expresses  a duty  for  every 


364  : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

member,  but  it  is  no  proof  of  every  member*s  power.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a 
question  of  Destiny,  who  makes  the  law  and  for  whom  it  is  made.  There  are 
subjects  and  there  are  objects  in  the  making  of  laws,  although  everyone  is  an 
object  as  to  the  validity  thereof — and  this  holds  good  without  distinction 
for  the  inner  law  of  families,  guilds,  estates,  and  states.  But  for  the  State, 
which  is  the  highest  law-subject  existing  in  historical  actuality,  there  is, 
besides,  an  external  law  that  it  imposes  upon  aliens  by  hostilities.  Ordinary 
civil  law  is  a case  of  the  first  kind,  a peace  treaty  of  the  second.  But  in  all  cases 
the  law  of  the  stronger  is  the  law  of  the  weaker  also.  To  ‘‘have  the  right*’ 
is  an  expression  of  power.  This  is  a historical  fact  that  every  moment  confirms, 
but  it  is  not  acknowledged  in  the  realm  of  truth,  which  is  not  of  this  world. 
In  their  conceptions  of  right,  therefore,  as  in  other  things,  being  and  waking- 
being, Destiny  and  Causality,  stand  implacably  opposed.  To  the  priestly  and 
idealistic  moral  of  good  and  evil  belongs  the  moral  distinction  of  right  and  wrongs 
but  in  the  race-moral  of  good  and  bad  the  distinction  is  between  those  who  give 
and  those  who  receive  the  law.  An  abstract  idea  of  justice  pervades  the  minds 
and  writings  of  all  whose  spirit  is  noble  and  strong  and  whose  blood  is  weak, 
pervades  all  religions  and  all  philosophies  — but  the  fact- world  of  history 
knows  only  the  success  which  turns  the  law  of  the  stronger  into  the  law  of  all. 
Over  ideals  it  marches  without  pity,  and  if  ever  a man  or  a people  renounces 
its  power  of  the  moment  in  order  to  remain  righteous  — then,  certainly,  his 
or  its  theoretical  fame  is  assured  in  the  second  world  of  thought  and  truth,  but 
assured  also  is  the  coming  of  a moment  in  which  it  will  succumb  to  another 
life-power  that  has  better  understood  realities. 

So  long  as  a historical  power  is  so  superior  to  its  constituent  units  — as  the 
State  or  the  estate  so  often  is  to  families  and  calling-classes,  or  the  head  of  the 
family  to  its  children  — a just  law  between  the  weaker  is  possible  as  a gift  from 
the  all-powerful  hand  of  the  disinterested.  But  Estates  seldom,  and  states 
almost  never,  feel  a power  of  this  magnitude  over  themselves,  and  consequently 
between  them  the  law  of  the  stronger  acts  with  immediate  force  — as  is  seen 
in  a victor’s  treaty,  unilateral  in  terms  and  still  more  so  in  interpretation  and 
observance.  That  is  the  difference  between  the  internal  and  the  external  rights 
of  historical  life-units.  In  the  first  the  will  of  an  arbiter  to  be  impartial  and 
just  can  be  eff’ective  — although  we  are  apt  to  deceive  ourselves  badly  as  to  the 
degree  of  effective  impartiality  even  in  the  best  codes  of  history,  even  in  those 
which  call  themselves  “civil”  or  hurgerlichf"  for  the  very  adjective  indicates 
that  an  estate  has  possessed  the  superior  force  to  impose  them  on  everyone.^ 
Internal  laws  are  the  result  of  strict  logical-causal  thought  centring  upon  truths, 
hut  for  that  very  reason  their  validity  is  ever  dependent  upon  the  material  power 
of  their  author,  be  this  Estate  or  State.  A revolution  that  annihilates  this 

^ Hence  such  codes  throw  out  the  privileges  of  nobility  and  clergy  and  sustain  those  of  money 
4nd  intellect,  and  display  a frank  preference  for  movable  as  against  real  property. 


::  STATE^AND  HISTORY  ' 3% 

power  annihilates  also  these  laws  — they  remain  true,  but  they  are  no  longer 
actual.  External  laws  on  the  other  hand,  such  as  all  peace  treaties,  are  essen- 
tially never  true  and  always  actual  — indeed  appallingly  so.  They  set  up  no 
pretension  whatever  of  being  just  — it  is  quite  enough  that  they  are  valid. 
Out  of  them  speaks  Life,  which  possesses  no  causal  and  moral  logic,  but  is 
organically  all  the  more  consistent  and  consequent  for  the  lack  of  it.  Its  will 
is  to  possess  validity  itself;  it  feels  with  an  inward  certainty  what  is  required 
to  that  end  and,  seeing  that,  knows  what  is  law  for  itself  and  has  to  be  made  law 
for  others.  This  logic  is  seen  in  every  family,  and  particularly  in  old  true-born 
peasant  families  as  soon  as  authority  is  shattered  and  someone  other  than  the 
head  tries  to  determine  “what  is.’V  It  appears  in  every  state,  as  soon  as  one 
party  therein  dominates  the  position.  Every  feudal  age  is  filled  with  the  con- 
tests between  lords  and  vassals  over  the  “right  to  rights.”  In  the  Classical 
world  this  conflict  ended  almost  everywhere  with  the  unconditional  victory 
of  the  First  Estate,  which  deprived  the  kingship  of  its  legislative  powers  and 
made  it  an  object  of  its  own  law-making  — as  the  origin  and  significance  of  the 
Archons  in  Athens  and  the  Ephors  in  Sparta  prove  beyond  doubt.  But  the  same 
happened  in  the  Western  field  too  — for  a moment  in  France  (institution  of 
the  States-General,  1302.),  and  for  good  in  England,  where  in  1x15  the  Norman 
baronage  and  the  higher  clergy  imposed  Magna  Charta  and  thus  sowed  the 
seed  that  was  to  ripen  into  the  effective  sovereignty  of  Parliament.  Hence  it 
was  that  the  old  Norman  law  of  the  Estates  here  remained  permanently  valid. 
In  Germany,  on  the  contrary,  the  weak  Imperial  power,  hard-pressed  by  the 
claims  of  the  great  feudatories,  called  in  the  “Roman”  law  of  Justinian  (that  is, 
the  law  of  the  unlimited  central  power)  to  aid  it  against  the  early  German  land- 
laws.^ 

The  Draconian  Constitution,  the  Trarplos  iroXirda  of  the  Oligarchs,  was  dic- 
tated by  the  nobility  like  the  strictly  patrician  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  in 
Rome;  ^ but  by  then  the  Late  period  of  the  Culture  was  well  under  way  and  the 
power  of  the  city  and  of  money  were  already  fully  developed,  so  that  laws 
directed  against  these  powers  necessarily  gave  way  very  promptly  to  laws  of  the 
Third  Estate  (Solon,  the  Tribunate).  Yet  these,  too,  were  estate-founded  laws 
not  less  than  their  predecessors.  The  struggle  between  the  two  primary  estates 
for  the  right  of  law-making  has  filled  the  entire  history  of  the  West,  from  the 
early  Gothic  conflict  of  secular  and  canon  law  for  supremacy,  to  the  controversy 
(not  ended  even  to-day)  concerning  civil  marriage.^  And,  for  that  matter, 
what  are  the  constitutional  conflicts  that  have  occurred  since  the  end  of  the 

^ Pp.  75,  et  seq.  The  corresponding  attempt  of  the  absolutist  Stuarts  to  introduce  Roman  Law 
into  England  was  defeated  chiefly  by  the  Puritan  jurist  Coke  (d.  1634)  — yet  another  proof  that 
the  spirit  of  laws  is  always  a party-spirit. 

2 See  pp.  65,  et  seq. 

® Above  all  in  connexion  with  divorce,  in  which  the  civil  and  the  ecclesiastical  views  both  hold 
good,  literally  side  by  side. 


OF, THE  WEST 

eighteenth  century  but  the  acquisition  by  the  Tiers.  Etat  (which,  according  to 
Sieyds’s  famous  remark  in  1789,  “was  nothing,  but  could  be  alF')  of  the  right 
to  legislate  bindingly  upon  all,  producing  a law  that  is  just  as  much  burghers’ 
law  as  ever  Gothic  was  nobles*  law.  The  nakedest  form  in  which  right  appears 
as  the  expression  of  might  is  (as  I have  already  observed)  in  interstate  treaty- 
making, in  peace  treaties,  and  in  that  Law  of  Nations  of  which  already  Mirabeau 
could  say  it  is  the  law  of  the  strong  of  which  the  observance  is  imposed  upon 
the  weak.  A large  part  of  the  decisions  of  world-history  is  contained  in  laws 
of  this  kind.  They  are  the  constitution  under  which  militant  history  progresses, 
so  long  as  it  does  not  revert  to  the  original  form  of  the  armed  conflict  — origi- 
nal, and  also  basic;  for  every  treaty  that  is  valid  and  is  meant  to  have  real 
effects  is  an  intellectual  continuation  thereof,  if  policy  is  war  by  other  means, ^ 
the  “ right  to  give  the  law*  * is  the  spoil  of  the  successful  party. 

II 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  on  the  heights  of  history  two  such  life-forms,  Estate 
and  State,  contend  for  supremacy,  both  being-streams  of  great  inward  form  and 
symbolic  force,  each  resolved  to  make  its  own  destiny  the  Destiny  of  the  whole. 
That  — if  we  try  to  understand  the  matter  in  its  depths  and  unreservedly  put 
aside  our  everyday  conceptions  of  people,  economy,  society,  and  politics — • 
is  the  meaning  of  the  opposition  between  the  social  and  the  political  conduct  of  events* 
Social  and  political  ideas  do  not  begin  to  be  differentiated  till  a great  Culture 
has  dawned,  or  even  till  feudalism  is  declining  and  the  lord- vassal  relation 
represents  the  social,  and  the  king-people  relation  the  political,  side.  But  the 
social  powers  of  the  early  time  (nobility  and  priesthood)  not  less  actively  than 
those  of  the  later  (money  and  mind)  — and  the  vocational  groups  of  the  crafts- 
men and  officials  and  workers,  too,  as  they  were  rising  to  their  power  in  the 
growing  cities  — sought,  each  for  itself,  to  subordinate  the  State-ideal  to  its 
own  Estate-ideal,  or  more  usually  to  its  estate  interests.  And  so  there  arose,  at 
all  planes  from  that  of  the  national  unit  to  that  of  the  individual  consciousness, 
a fight  over  the  respective  limits  and  claims  of  each  — the  result  of  which,  in 
extreme  cases,  is  that  the  one  element  succeeds  so  completely  as  to  make  the 
other  its  tool.® 

^ See  p.  330.  — Tf. 

2 Thus  come  about  the  much  satirized  forms  of  the  “patrol-**  or  “barrack-state,”  as  opponents 
call  it  with  an  unintelligent  scorn.  Similar  points  of  view  appear  also  in  Chinese  and  Greek  con- 
stitutional theories  (O.  Franke,  Studien  rur  Geschichn  des  konfut^ianischen  Dogmas  (1910),  pp.  2.1 1,  et 
seq.;  Pohlmann,  Geschkhte  der  so^iaUn  Frage  und  d&r  Sozialismus  in  der  antiken  Welt  (i9ix).  On  the 
Other  hand,  the  political  tastes  of,  for  example,  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,  who  as  a Classicist  opposed 
the  individual  to  the  State,  belong,  not  to  political  history  *at  all,  but  to  literature.  For  what  he 
looked  at  was,  not  the  capacity  of  the  State  to  thrive  in  the  real  State-world  around  it,  but  its  pri- 
vate existence  within  itself,  without  regard  to  the  fact  that  such  an  ideal  could  not  endure  for  an 
instant  in  the  face  of  a neglected  outesr  situation.  It  is  a basic  error  of  the  ideologues  that,  in  con- 
centrating on  the  private  life  and  referring  to  it  the  whole  inner  structure  of  the  State,  they  entirely 
ignore  the  latter*s  position  in  point  of  outward  power,  though  this  in  fact  completely  conditions  its 


^ ^ ^ ^ ^ AND  HISTORY  ^ ^ ^ 

In  all  cases,  however,  it  is  the  State  that  determines  the  position,  and 

therefore  the  historical  relations  between  peoples  are  always  oi  a political  and 
not  a social  nature.  In  domestic  politics,  on  the  contrary,  the  situation  is  so 
dominated  by  class-oppositions  that  at  first  sight  social  and  political  tactics 
appear  inseparable,  and  indeed,  in  the  thought  of  people  who  (as,  for  example, 
a bourgeoisie)  equate  their  own  class-ideal  with  historical  actuality  — and 
consequently  cannot  think  in  external  politics  at  all  — identical.  In  the  ex- 
ternal battle  the  State  seeks  alliances  with  other  States,  in  the  internal  it  is 
always  in  alliance  with  one  or  another  Estate  — the  sixth-century  Tyrannis, 
for  instance,  rested  upon  the  combination  of  the  State-idea  with  the  interests  of 
the  Third  Estate  vis-h-vis  the  ancient  noble  oligarchy,  and  the  French  Revolu- 
tion became  inevitable  from  the  moment  that  the  Tiers  — that  is,  intellect 
and  money  — left  its  friend  the  Crown  in  the  lurch  and  joined  the  two  other 
Estates  (from  the  Assembly  of  Notables,  1787).  We  are  thoroughly  right  there- 
fore in  feeling  a distinction  between  State-history  and  class-history, I-  between 
political  (horizontal)  and  social  (vertical)  history,  war  and  revolution. ^ But 
it  is  a grave  error  of  modern  doctrinaires  to  regard  the  spirit  of  domestic  history 
as  that  of  history  in  general.  World-histoty  is,  and  always  will  be,  State-histofy. 
The  inner  constitution  of  a nation  aims  always  at  being  in  condition'  for  the 
outer  fight  (diplomatic,  military,  or  economic)  and  anyone  who  treats  a na- 
tion’s constitution  as  an  aim  and  ideal  in  itself  is  merely  ruining  the  nation’s 
body.  But,  from  the  other  point  of  view,  it  falls  to  the  inner-political  pulse- 
sense  of  a ruling  stratum  (whether  belonging  to  the  First  or  to  the  Fourth 
Estate)  so  to  manage  the  internal  class-oppositions  that  the  focus  and  ideas  of 
the  nation  are  not  tied  up  in  party  conflict,  nor  treason  to  the  country  thought 
of  as  an  ace  of  trumps. 

And  here  it  becomes  manifest  that  the  State  and  the  first  Estate  are  cognate 
down  to  the  roots  — akin,  not  merely  by  reason  of  their  symbolism  of  Time  and 
Care,  their  common  relation  to  race  and  the  facts  of  genealogical  succession, 
to  the  family  and  to  the  primary  impulses  of  all  peasantry  (on  which  in  the 
last  analysis  every  State  and  every  nobility  is  supported)  — not  merely  in  their 
relation  to  the  soil,  the  clan-domain  (be  this  heritable  estate  or  fatherland), 
which  even  in  nations  of  the  Magian  style  is  lowered  in  significance  only  because 
there  the  dignity  of  orthodoxy  so  completely  surpasses  everything  else  — but 
above  all  in  high  practice  amidst  all  the  facts  of  the  historical  world,  in  the 

freedom  for  the  inward  development.  The  difference  between  the  French  and  the  German  Revolu- 
tions, for  example,  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  one  commanded  the  external  situation  and  therewith 
the  internal  also,  while  the  other  commanded  neither  and  was  foredoomed  to  farce. 

^ Which  is  most  definitely  not  identical  with  economic  history  in  the  sense  of  the  materialist 
historian.  More  of  this  in  the  next  chapter. 

2 It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  author  iiscs  the  terms  '‘horizontal"  and  "vertical"  here  in  the  re- 
verse sense  to  that  in  which  they  commonly  figure  in  present-day  political  literature,  although  in 
economic  works  the  usage  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  text.  — Tr. 


368  ' ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE'  WEST 

unforced  unity  of  pulse  and  impulse,  diplomacy,  judgment  of  men,  the  art  of 
command  and  masculine  will  to  keep  and  extend  power,  which  even  in  earliest 
times  differentiated  a nobility  and  a people  out  of  the  one  and  the  same  war* 
gathering;  and,  lastly,  in  the  feeling  for  honour  and  bravery.  Hence,  right 
up  to  the  latest  phases,  that  State  stands  firmest  in  which  the  nobility  or  the 
tradition  shaped  by  the  nobility  is  wholly  at  the  service  of  the  common  cause 

— as  it  was  in  Sparta  as  compared  with  Athens,  in  Rome  ms-h-vis  Carthage,  in 
Tsin  as  against  the  to-coloured  state  of  Tsu. 

The  distinction  is  that  a nobility  self-contained  as  a class  — or  for  that 
matter  any  Estate  — experiences  the  residue  of  the  nation  only  with  reference  to 
itself,  and  only  desires  to  exercise  power  in  that  sense,  whereas  the  very  prin- 
ciple of  the  State  is  that  it  cares  for  ail,  and  cares  for  the  nobility  as  such  only 
in  relation  to  the  major  care.  But  a genuine  old  nobility  assimilates  itself  to 
the  State,  and  cares  for  all  as  though  for  a property.  This  care,  in  fact,  is  one 
of  its  grandest  duties  and  one  of  which  it  is  most  deeply  conscious;  it  feels  it, 
indeed,  an  innate  privilege^  and  regards  service  in  the  army  and  the  administra- 
tion as  its  special  vocation. 

It  is,  however,  a distinction  of  quite  another  kind  that  holds  as  between  the 
State-idea  and  the  idea  of  any  one  of  the  other  Estates.  All  these  are  inwardly 
alien  to  the  State  as  such,  and  the  State-ideals  that  they  fashion  out  of  their 
own  lives  have  not  grown  up  out  of  the  spirit  arid  the  political  forces  of  actual 
history  — hence,  indeed,  the  conscious  emphasis  with  which  they  are  labelled 
as  social.  And  while  in  Early  times  the  situation  is  simply  that  historical  facts 
oppose  the  Church-community  in  its  efforts  to  actualize  religious  ideals,  in  Late 
periods  both  the  business  ideal  of  the  free  economic  life,  and  the  Utopian  ideal 
of  the  enthusiast  who  would  actualize  this  or  that  abstraction,  also  come  into 
the  field. 

But  in  the  historical  world  there  are  no  ideals,  but  only  facts  — no  truths, 
but  only  facts.  There  is  no  reason,  no  honesty,  no  equity,  no  final  aim,  but 
only  facts,  and  anyone  who  does  not  realize,  this  should  write  books  on  politics 

— let  him  not  try  to  make  politics.  In  the  real  world  there  are  no  states  built 
according  to  ideals,  but  only  states  that  have  grown,  and  these  are  nothing 
but  living  peoples  “in  form.’*  No  doubt  it  is  “the  form  impressed  that  living 
doth  itself  unfold,”  but  the  impress  has  been  that  of  the  blood  and  beat  of  a 
beings  wholly  instinctive  and  involuntary;  and  as  to  the  unfolding,  if  it  is 
guided  by  the  master  of  politics,  it  takes  the  direction  inherent  in  the  blood; 
if  by  the  idealist,  that  dictated  by  his  own  convictions  — in  other  words,  the 
way  to  nullity. 

But  the  destiny  question,  for  States  that  exist  in  reality  and  not  merely  in 
intellectual  schemes,  is  not  that  of  their  ideal  task  or  structure,  but  that  of  their 
inner  authority^  which  cannot  in  the  long  run  be  maintained  by  material  means, 
but  only  by  a belief  — of  friend  and  foe  — in  their  effectiveness.  The  decisive 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  3^9 

problems  lie,  not  in  the  working-out  of  constitutions,  but  in  the  organization 
of  a sound  working  government;  not  in  the  distribution  of  political  rights 
according  to  '‘  just*'  principles  (which  at  bottom  are  simply  the  idea  that  a 
forms  of  its  own  legitimate  claims),  but  in  the  efHcient  pulse  of  the  whole 
(elHcicnt  in  the  sense  that  the  play  of  muscle  and  sinew  is  efHcient  when  an 
extended  racehorse  nears  the  winning-post),  in  that  rhythm  which  attracts 
even  strong  genius  into  syntony;  not,  lastly,  in  any  world-alien  moral,  but 
in  the  steadiness,  sureness,  and  superiority  of  political  leadership.  The  more 
self-evident  all  these  things  are,  the  less  is  said  or  argued  about  them;  the  more 
fully  matured  the  State,  the  higher  the  standing,  the  historical  capacity,  and 
therefore  the  Destiny  of  the  Nation.  State-majesty,  sovereignty,  is  a life- 
symbol  of  the  first  order.  It  distinguishes  subjects  and  objects in  political 
events  not  only  in  inner,  but  also  (which  is  far  more  important)  in  external, 
history.  Strength  of  leadership,  which  comes  to  expression  in  the  clear  separa- 
tion of  these  two  factors,  is  the  unmistakable  sign  of  the  life-force  in  a political 
unity  — so  much  so  that  the  shattering  of  existing  authority  (for  example, 
by  the  supporters  of  an  opposed  constitutional  ideal)  almost  always  results  not 
in  this  new  party's  making  itself  the  subject  of  domestic  policy,  but  in  the 
whole  nation's  becoming  the  object  of  alien  policy  — and  not  seldom  for  ever. 

For  this  reason,  in  every  healthy  State  the  letter  of  the  written  constitution 
is  of  small  importance  compared  with  the  practice  of  the  living  constitution, 
the  “form"  (to  use  again  the  sporting  term),  which  has  developed  of  itself 
out  of  the  experience  of  Time,  the  situation,  and,  above  all,  the  race-properties 
of  the  Nation.  The  more  powerfully  the  natural  form  of  the  body  politic  has 
built  itself  up,  the  more  surely  it  works  in  unforeseen  situations;  indeed, 
in  the  limit,  it  does  not  matter  whether  the  actual  leader  is  called  King  or 
Minister  or  party-leader,  or  even  (as  in  the  case  of  Cecil  Rhodes)  that  he  has  no 
defined  relation  to  the  State.  The  nobility  which  managed  Roman  politics  in 
the  period  of  the  three  Punic  Wars  had,  from  the  point  of  view  of  constitutional 
law,  no  existence  whatever The  leader’s  responsibility  is  always  to  a minority 
that  possesses  the  instincts  of  statesmanship  and  represents  the  rest  of  the  nation 
in  the  struggle  of  history. 

The  fact,  therefore,  express  and  unequivocal,  is  that  class-States  — that  is. 
States  in  which  particular  classes  rule  — are  the  only  States.  This  must  not  be 
confused  with  the  class-States  to  which  the  individual  is  merely  attached  in  view 
of  belonging  to  an  estate,  as  in  the  case  of  the  older  Polls,  the  Norman  States  of 
England  and  Sicily,  the  France  of  the  Constitution  of  1791,  and  Soviet  Russia 
to-day.  The  true  class-State  is  an  expression  of  the  general  historical  experience 

^ Attention  is  drawn  to  this  phrase,  so  as  to  avoid  misconceptions  as  to  the  meaning  of  “sub- 
ject” in  the  sequel.  — Tf. 

® Compare  the  position  of  the  aristocratic  families  of  the  South  in  the  history  of  the  United 
States  up  to  1850-60,  — Tr. 


370-  ' THE'  DECLINE  *OF  THE'  WEST 

that  it  is  always  a single  social  stratum  which,  constitutiojially  or  otherwise, 
provides  the  political  leading.  It  is  always  a definite  minority  that  represents 
the  world-historical  tendency  of  a State;  and,  within  that  again,  it  is  a more 
or  less  self-contained  minority  that  in  virtue  of  its  aptitudes  (and  often  enough 
against  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution)  actually  holds  the  reins.  And,  if  we 
ignore,  as  exceptions  proving  the  rule,  revolutionary  interregna  and  Caesarian 
conditions,  in  which  individuals  and  fortuitous  groupings  maintain  their 
power  merely  by  material  means  (and  often  without  any  aptitude  for  ruling), 
it  is  always  the  minority  within  an  Estate  thsLt  rules  by  tradition.  In  by  far  the 
greater  number  of  cases  this  minority  is  one  within  the  nobility  — for  example, 
the  ** gentry'’  which  governed  the  Parliamentary  style  of  England,  the  mobiles 
at  the  helm  of  Roman  politics  in  Punic  War  times,  the  merchaat-aristocracy  of 
Venice,  the  Jesuit-trained  (nobles  who  conducted  the  diplomacy  of  the  Papal 
Curia  in  the  Baroque).^  Similarly,  we  find  the  political  aptitude  in  self-con- 
tained groups  within  the  religious  Estate  — not  only  in  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church,  but  also  in  Egypt  and  India  and  still  more  in  Byzantium  and  Sassanid 
Persia.  In  the  Third  Estate  — though  this  seldom  produces  it,  not  being  in 
itself  a life-unit  — there  are  cases  such  as  those  of  third-century  Rome,  where  a 
stratum  of  the  plebs  contains  men  trained  in  commerce,  and  France  since  1789, 
where  an  element  of  the  bourgeoisie  has  been  trained  in  law;  in  these  cases,  it 
is  ensured  by  a closed  circle  of  persons  possessing  homogeneous  practical  gifts, 
which  constantly  recruits  itself  and  preserves  in  its  midst  the  whole  sum  of 
unwritten  political  tradition  and  experience. 

That  is  the  organization  of  actual  states  in  contradistinction  to  those  con- 
ceived on  paper  and  in  the  minds  of  pedants.  There  is  no  best,  or  true,  or  right 
State  that  could  possibly  be  actualized  according  to  plan.  Every  State  that 
emerges  in  history  exists  as  it  is  but  once  and  for  a moment;  the  next  moment  it 
has,  unpcrceived,  become  different,  whatever  the  rigidity  of  its  legal-constitu- 
tional crust.  Therefore,  words  like ''republic,"  "absolutism,"  "democracy," 
mean  something  different  in  every  instance,  and  what  turns  them  into  catch- 
words is  their  use  as  definite  concepts  by  philosophers  and  ideologues.  A history 
of  States  is  physiognomic  and  not  systematic.  Its  business  is  not  to  show  how 
"humanity"  advances  to  the  conquest  of  its  eternal  rights,  to  freedom  and 
equality,  to  the  evolving  of  a super-wise  and  super-just  State,  but  to  describe 
the  political  units  that  really  exist  in  the  fact-world,  how  they  grow  and 
flourish  and  fade,  and  how  they  are  really  nothing  but  actual  life  "in  form." 
Let  us  make  the  attempt  on  this  basis. 

^ For  in  those  centuries  the  high  dignities  of  the  Church  were  invariably  given  to  the  nobility 
of  Europe,  who  put  the  political  qualities  of  the  blood  at  her  service.  From  this  school  in  turn 
emanated  statesmen  like  Richelieu,  Mazarin,  and  Talleyrand,  to  name  but  a few. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY 


371 


III 

History  in  the  high  style  begins  in  every  Culture  with  the  feudal  State, 
which  is  not  a State  in  the  coming  sense  of  the  word,  but  an  ordering  of  the 
common  life  with  reference  to  an  Estate.  The  noblest  fruit  of  the  soil,  its  race 
in  the  proudest  sense,  here  builds  itself  up  in  a rank-order  from  the  simple 
knighthood  to  the  primus  inter  pares ^ the  feudal  Overlord  amongst  his  Peers, 
This  sets  in  simultaneously  with  the  architecture  of  the  great  cathedrals  and  the 
Pyramid’s  — the  stone  and  the  blood  elevated  into  symbols,  the  one  meaning., 
the  other  being.  The  idea  of  feudalism,  which  has  dominated  all  Springtimes, 
is  the  transition  from  the  primitive,  purely  practical  and  factual,  relationship  of 
potentate  to  those  who  obey  him  (whether  they  have  chosen  him  or  have  been 
subdued  by  him)  into  the  private-law  (and,  therefore,  deeply  symbolical) 
relation  of  the  lord  to  the  vassal.  This  relation  rests  entirely  upon  the  ethic  of 
nobility,  honour,  and  loyalty,  and  conjures  up  the  cruellest  conflicts  between 
duty  to  one's  lord  and  duty  to  one's  own  family.  The  decadence  of  Henry  the 
Lion  ^ is  a tragic  example  of  it. 

The  ‘‘State"  exists  here  only  to  the  extent  of  the  limits  of  the  feudal  tie, 
and  it  expands  its  domain  by  the  entry  of  alien  vassals  therein.  Service  to,  and 
agency  for,  the  ruler  — originally  personal  and  limited  in  time  ■—  very  soon 
became  the  permanent  fief  which,  if  it  escheated,  to  be  reassigned  (already 
by  1000  the  principle  of  the  West  was  "No  land  without  a lord"),  and  from  that 
presently  passed  to  the  stage  of  being  hereditary  (law  of  Emperor  Conrad  II, 
2.8th  May  1037).  Thereby  the  formerly  immediate  subjects  of  the  ruler  were 
mediatized,  and  henceforth  they  were  only  his  subjects  as  being  subjects  of  a 
vassal  of  his.  Nothing  but  the  strong  social  interbonding  of  the  Estate  ensured 
the  cohesion  of  what  must  be  called,  even  under  these  conditions,  the  State. 

The  idea  of  power  and  booty  are  seen  here  in  classic  union.  When,  in  1066, 
William  and  his  Norman  chivalry  conquered  England,  the  whole  land  was  made 
King's  property  and  fee,  and  it  remains  so  in  name  to  this  day.  Here  is  a true 
Viking  delight  in  "having,"  the  care  of  an  Odysseus  who  begins  by  counting 
his  treasure,^  From  this  booty-sense  of  shrewd  conquerors  there  came,  quite 
suddenly,  the  famous  exchequer-practice  and  officialdom  of  the  early  Cultures. 
It  is  well  to  distinguish  these  officials  from  the  incumbents  of  the  great  confiden- 
tial offices  which  had  arisen  out  of  the  older  personal  agency;  ® they  were 
clerici  or  clerks,  and  not  ministeriales  or  ministers  — " servants,"  but  in  a prouder 
sense  now.  The  financial  and  clerical  officialdom  is  an  expression  of  Care, 
and  it  develops  in  exact  proportion  with  the  development  of  the  dynastic  idea. 
Thus  in  Egypt  it  reached  an  astonishingly  high  level  at  the  very  beginning  of 

^ See  p.  180. 

® I c.,  Domesday  Book.  — Tr. 

■ ■ ® See  p.  350. 


' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

the  Old  Kingdom.^  The  early  Chinese  official-State  described  in  the  ChSu-U 
is  so  comprehensive  and  complicated  that  the  authenticity  of  the  book  has 
been  doubted, 2 but  in  spirit  and  tendency  it  corresponds  exactly  with  that  of 
Diocletian,  which  enabled  a feudal  order  to  arise  out  of  an  immense  fiscal 
machinery.®  In  the  early  Classical  world  it  is  markedly  absent.  "Carpe  diem'* 
was  the  motto  of  Classical  economics  from  the  first  to  last,  and  in  this  domain  as 
in  others  Improvidence,  the  autarkeia  of  the  Stoics,  was  elevated  into  a principle. 
Even  the  best  calculators  were  no  exception  — thus  Eubulus  in  Athens,  330  b.c., 
managed  business  with  an  eye  to  surpluses,  but  only  to  distribute  them,  when 
gained,  amongst  the  citizens. 

The  extreme  contrast  to  Eubulus’s  finance  is  afforded  by  the  canny  Vikings 
of  the  early  West,  who  by  the  financial  administration  of  their  Norman  states 
laid  the  foundations  of  the  Faustian  economics  that  extend  to-day  over  the 
whole  world.  It  is  from  the  chequered  table  in  the  Norman  counting-house 
of  Robert  the  Devil  (102.8-35)  that  we  have  the  name  of  the  English  “Ex- 
chequer*’ and  hence  the  word  “cheque.”  Here  also  originated  the  words 
“control,”  “quittance,”  “record.”^  Here  it  was  that  after  1066  England  was 
organized  as  booty,  with  ruthless  reduction  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  to  serfdom, 
and  here  too  originated  the  Norman  State  of  Sicily — for  it  was  not  upon 
nothing  that  Frederick  II  of  Hohenstaufen  later  built;  his  most  personal  work, 
the  constitutions  of  Melfi  (1131)  he  did  not  create,  but  only  (by  methods  bor- 
rowed from  the  money-economics  of  high  Arabian  Civilization)  polished  and 
perfected.  From  this  centre  the  methodic  and  descriptive  technique  of  finance 
spread  into  the  business  world  of  Lombardy  and  so  into  all  the  trading  cities 
and  administrations  of  the  West. 

But  in  Feudalism  build-up  and  breakdown  lie  close  together.  When  the 
primary  estates  were  still  in  full  bloom  and  vigour,  the  future  nations,  and 
with  them  the  germ  of  the  State-idea  proper,  were  stirring  into  life.  The  oppo- 
sition between  temporal  and  spiritual  power  and  that  between  crown  and 
vassals  was  cut  across  again  and  again  by  oppositions  of  nationhood  — German- 
French  even  from  Otto  the  Great’s  times;  German-Italian,  which  rent  Italy 
between  the  Guelphs  and  Ghibellines  and  destroyed  the  German  Empire; 
French-English,  which  brought  about  the  English  dominion  over  western 
France.  Still,  all  this  was  far  less  important  than  the  great  decisions  within 
the  feudal  order  iself,  where  the  idea  of  nationality  was  unknown.  England 
was  broken  up  into  6o,X5i  fiefs,  catalogued  in  the  Domesday  Book  of  1084 
(consulted  even  to-day  upon  occasion),  and  the  strictly  organized  central  power 

^ Ed.  Meyer^  Gesch.  d.  AltertumSyl^  §144. 

* Even  by  Chinese  critics.  Sec,  however,  Schindler,  Das  Friesterttm  im  dtm  CUm^  I,  pp.  61,  et 
seq.;  Conrady,  China^  p.  533. 

® Sec  pp.  349,  ct  seq. 

^ '*C(mptus**  ** contrarotulus*'  (the  counter-roll  retained  for  checking),  quittancid'  “ recorda- 
turn."* 


STATE- AND- HISTORY  373 

required  allegiance  to  itself  even  from  the  sub-tcoants  of  the  peers,  but  all  the  : 
same  it  was  less  than  a hundred  and  fifty  years  later  that  Magna  Charta  was 
forced  through  (12.15),  and  actual  power  transferred  from  the  King  to  the 
Parliament  of  the  vassals  — made  up  of  great  barons  and  ecclesiastics  in  the 
Upper  house,  gentry  and  patricians  in  the  Lower  — which  thenceforward 
became  the  support  and  champion  of  national  development.  In  France  the 
baronage,  in  conjunction  with  the  clergy  and  the  towns,  forced  the  calling  of  the 
States-General  in  1302.;  the  General  Privilege  of  Saragossa  in  1183  made  Aragon 
into  a quasi-republic  of  nobles  ruled  by  its  Cortes,  and  in  Germany  a few  decades 
earlier  a group  of  great  vassals  made  the  election  of  the  German  Kingship 
dependent  upon  themselves  as  Electors. 

The  mightiest  expression  that  the  feudal  idea  found  for  itself  — not  merely 
in  the  West,  but  in  any  Culture  — came  out  in  the  struggle  between  Empire 
and  Papacy,  both  of  which  dreamed  of  a consummation  in  which  the  en- 
tire world  was  to  become  an  immense  feudal  system,  and  so  intimately  enwove 
themselves  into  the  dream  that,  with  the  decay  of  feudalism,  both  together  fell 
from  their  heights  in  lamentable  ruin. 

The  idea  of  a Ruler  whose  writ  should  run  throughout  the  whole  historical 
world,  whose  Destiny  should  be  that  of  all  mankind,  has  taken  visible  shape 
in,  so  far,  three  instances  — firstly,  in  the  conception  of  the  Pharaoh  as  Horus;  ^ 
secondly,  in  the  great  Chinese  imagining  of  the  Ruler  of  the  Middle,  whose 
domain  is  tkn-hia,  everything  lying  below  the  heavens;  ^ and,  thirdly,  in 
early  Gothic  times.  In  962.  Otto  the  Great,  answering  to  the  deep  mystical 
sense  and  yearning  for  historical  and  spatial  infinity  that  was  sweeping  through 
the  world  of  those  days,  conceived  the  idea  of  the  “Holy  Roman  Empire, 
German  by  nation.*’  But  even  earlier.  Pope  Nicolas  I (860),  still  completely 
involved  in  Augustinian  — that  is,  Magian  — lines  of  thought,  had  dreamed 
of  a Papal  democracy  which  was  to  stand  above  the  princes  of  this  world,  and 
from  1059  Gregory  VII  with  all  the  prime  force  of  his  Faustian  nature  set  out  to 
actualize  a papal  world-dominion  under  the  forms  of  a universal  feudalism,  with 
kings  as  vassals.  The  Papacy  itself,  indeed,  under  its  domestic  aspect,  con- 
stituted the  small  feudal  State  of  the  Campagna,  whose  noble  families  controlled 
the  election  of  popes,  and  which  very  rapidly  converted  the  college  of  cardinals 
(to  which  the  duty  was  entrusted  from  1059  on)  into  a sort  of  noble  oligarchy. 
But  under  the  broader  aspect  of  external  policy  Gregory  VII  actually  obtained 
feudal  supremacy  over  the  Norman  states  of  England  and  Sicily,  both  of  which 
were  created  with  his  support,  and  actually  awarded  the  Imperial  crown  as  Otto 

^ Seep.  X79. 

® “ For  the  ruler  of  the  Middle  there  is  no  foreign  laud**  CKung-yang).  “The  heaven  speaks  not; 
it  causes  its  thoughts  to  be  ptomulgatcd  by  a man"  (Tung  Chung-shu).  His  errors  affect  the  whole 
Cosmos  and  bring  about  cataclysms  in  Nature  (O.  Franke,  Zur  Geschkhte  des  konfis^ianischen  Dogmas 
(1910),  pp.  2.IZ,  et  seq.,  1.44,  ct  scq,).  Such  mystic  universalism  was  completely  alien  to  Indian 
and  Classical  state-notions. 


374.  ■ the  decline  OF  THE  WEST  ; ^ 

the  Great  had  awarded  the  tiara.  But  a little  later  Henry  VI  of  Hohenstaufen 
succeeded  in  the  opposite  sense;  even  Richard  Coeur-de-Lion  swore  the  vassal’s 
oath  to  him  for  England,  and  the  universal  Empire  was  on  the  point  of  becoming 
a fact  when  the  greatest  of  all  popes,  Innocent  III  (ii98“izi6)  made  the  papal 
overlordship  of  the  world  real  for  a short  time.  England  became  a Papal  fief 
in  1x13;  Aragon  and  Leon  and  Portugal,  Denmark  and  Poland  and  Hungary, 
Armenia  and  the  recently  founded  Latin  Empire  in  Byzantium  followed.  But 
with  Innocent’s  death  disintegration  set  in  within  the  Church  itself,  and 
the  great  spiritual  dignitaries,  whom  their  investitures  turned  into  vassals  of 
the  Pope  as  overlord,  soon  followed  the  lay  vassals’  example  and  set  about 
limiting  him  by  means  of  respresentative  institutions  for  their  order.  ^ The 
notion  that  a General  Council  stood  higher  than  a pope  was  not  of  religious 
origin,  but  arose  primarily  out  of  the  feudal  principle.  Its  tendency  corre- 
sponded precisely  to  that  which  the  English  magnates  had  made  good  in  Magna 
Charta.  In  the  councils  of  Constance  (1414)  and  Basel  (1431)  the  last  attempts 
were  made  to  turn  the  Church,  under  its  temporal  aspect,  into  a clerical  feudal- 
ism, in  which  an  oligarchy  of  cardinals  would  have  become  the  representative 
of  the  whole  Clerical  Estate  of  the  West  and  taken  the  place  hitherto  held  by 
the  Roman  nobility.  But  by  that  time  the  feudal  idea  had  long  taken  second 
place  to  that  of  the  State,  and  so  the  Roman  barons  won  the  victory.  The  field  of 
candidature  for  the  Papacy  was  limited  to  the  narrowest  environs  of  Rome,  and 
unlimited  power  over  the  organizations  of  the  Church  was  ipso  facto  secured 
to  the  centre.  As  for  the  Empire,  it  had  long  ago  become  a venerated  shadow, 
like  the  Egyptian  and  the  Chinese. 

In  comparison  with  the  immense  dynamism  of  these  decisions,  the  build- 
ing-up of  feudalism  in  the  Classical  world  was  slow,  static,  almost  noiseless, 
so  that  it  is  hardly  recognizable  save  from  the  traces  of  transition.  In  the 
Homeric  epos  as  we  have  it  now,  every  locality  possesses  its  Basileus,  who,  it 
is  fairly  evident,  was  once  a great  vassal  — ^ we  can  see  in  the  figure  of  Agamem- 
non the  conditions  in  which  the  ruler  of  a wide  region  took  the  field  with  the 
train  of  his  peers.  But  in  the  Greek  world  the  dissolution  of  the  feudal  world 
was  associated  with  the  formation  of  the  rirj-state,  the  political  “point.” 
In  consequence,  the  hereditary  court-offices,  the  arch ai  2ini  timai^  the  prj^taneisy 
the  Archons,  and  perhaps  the  original  Prxtor,^  were  all  urban  in  nature;  and  the 

^ It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  immense  domains  of  the  Church  had  become  hereditary  fiefs 
of  the  bishops  and  archbishops,  who  were  no  more  disposed  than  the  lay  peers  to  permit  interferences 
■'OQ.  the:  part, 'of  the  overlord. 

2 After  the  overthrow  of  the  Tyranms,  c.  500,  the  two  regents  of  the  Roman  patriciate  bear  the 
title  prafor  or  judex.  But  it  seems  to  me  probable  that  these  go  back  beyond  the  Tyrannis  and  even 
the  preceding  oligarchic  period  into  that  of  the  kingship  proper,  and  that  as  court-offices  they  have 
the  same  origin  as  our  Herzog,  duke  QradPor');  Hmwart,  in  Athens  polcmarch;  and  Graf,  cserl  Q"  Ding- 
graff'  hereditary  arbiter,  in  Athens  archon).  The  name  “ (from  366)  is  philoiogicaliy 

thoroughly  archaic,  and  therefore  implies  no  new  creation,  but  the  renascence  of  a title  (king’s 
adviser?)  which  oligarchic  sentiment  had  long  repudiated. 


STATE  AND.  HISTORY.  : 375 

great  families  tlicrefore  developed,  not  separately  in  their  counties,  as  in  Egypt, 
China,  and  the  West,  but  in  the  closest  touch  with  the  city,  where  they  obtained 
possession  of  the  rights  of  the  King,  one  after  the  other,  until  nothing  was 
left  to  the  ruling  house  but  that  which  could  not  be  touched  because  of  the 
gods  — namely,  the  title  attaching  to  ijs  sacrificial  function  (hence  the 
sacromm).  In  the  later  parts  of  the  Homeric  epic  (c,  800)  it  is  the  nobles  who 
invite  the  king  to  take  his  seat,  and  even  unseat  him.  The  Odyssey  really 
knows  the  kingship  only  as  part  of  the  saga  — the  actual  Ithaca  that  it  shows 
us  is  a city  dominated  by  oligarchs.^  The  Spartiates,  like  the  Roman  partriciate 
of  the  Comitia  Curiata,  are  the  product  of  a feudal  relation.^  In  the  fhidifia  ^ 
there  are  evident  remains  of  the  old  open  table  of  the  noble,  but  the  power  of 
the  king  has  sunk  to  the  shado-wy  dignity  of  the  rex  sacrorum  of  Rome,  or  the 
**  kings’*  of  Sparta,  who  were  liable  to  be  imprisoned  or  removed  at  any  time 
by  the  Ephors.  The  essential  similarity  of  these  conditions  forces  us  to  presume 
that  in  Rome  the  Tarquinian  Tyrannis  of  500  was  preceded  by  a period  of 
oligarchical  dominance,  and  this  view  is  supported  by  the  unquestionably 
genuine  tradition  of  the  InUrrex,  a person  appointed  by  the  council  of  the 
nobles  (the  Senate)  from  amongst  its  own  members  to  act  until  it  should  please 
them  to  elect  a king  again. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  there  comes  a time  in  which  feudalism  is  falling  into 
decay,  but  the  coming  State  is  not  yet  completed,  the  nation  not  yet  “in  form.** 
This  is  the  fearful  crisis  that  emerges  everywhere  in  the  shape  of  the  Interreg- 
num, and  forms  the  boundary  between  the  feudal  union  and  the  class-State.  In 
Egypt  feudalism  was  fully  developed  by  about  the  middle  of  the  Vth  Dynasty. 
The  Pharaoh  Asosi  gave  away  his  domains  literally  piece  by  piece  to  the  vassals, 
and,  further,  the  rich  fiefs  of  the  priesthood  were  (exactly  as  in  the  West)  free  of 
taxation  and  gradually  became  the  permanent  property  (“mortmain,**  as  we 
should  say)  of  the  great  temples.^  With  the  Vth  Dynasty  (r.  ^530  b.c.)  the 
“ Hohenstaufen”  age  comes  to  an  end.  Under  the  shadow-kingship  of  the  short- 
lived Vlth  Dynasty  the  princes  (r^^ri)  and  counts  (Joetid)  become  independent; 
the  high  offices  are  all  hereditary  and  the  tomb-inscriptions  show  us  more  and 
more  proud  stress  upon  ancient  lineage.  That  which  later  Egyptian  historians 
have  hidden  under  the  reputed  VII th  and  Vlllth  dynasties  ^ is  really  half  a 
century  of  anarchy  and  lawless  conflicts  between  princes  for  each  other’s  do- 
mains or  for  the  Pharaoh-title.  In  China,  even  I-Wang  (93  4-909)  was  obliged 
by  his  vassals  to  give  out  all  conquered  lands,  and  to  do  so  to  sub-tenants 

^ Bc\och.,Griechische  Geschichte^l, 

® The  Spartiates  mustered  in  the  best  period  of  the  sixth  century  some  4000  warriors,  out  of  a 
total  population  of  nearly  300,000,  including  Pcrioeci  and  Helots  (Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  d,  Mt,^  III, 
§ a64}.  The  Roman  families  must  at  that  time  have  been  of  about  the  same  strength  relatively  to  the 
and  the  Latins. 

® Men’s  messes.  Sec  the  article  XvaraLna  in  Smith’s  Dictionary  of  Classical  Antiquities,  — Tr. 

^ Ed,  Meyer,  Geschichte  des  Alt.,  1,^x6^. 

^ Ed.  Meyer,  Gesck,  d.  Alt,,  I,  § 2.67,  et  seq. 


376  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

nominated  by  them.  In  841  Li-Wang  was  forced,  with  his  heir,  to  flee,  and  the 
administration  of  the  Empire  was  carried  on  by  two  individual  princes.  In  this 
interregnum  began  the  fall  of  the  House  of  Chou  and  the  decline  of  the  Imperial 
name  into  an  honourable  but  meaningless  title.  It  is  the  corresponding  picture 
to  that  of  the  Interregnum  in  Germany,  which  began  in  1x54  and  brought  the 
Imperial  power  to  its  nadir  of  1400  under  Wenceslaus,  simultaneously  with  the 
Renaissance-style  of  the  condottieri  and  the  complete  decay  of  the  Papal  power. 
After  the  death  of  Boniface  VIII,  who  in  i30x  had  once  again  asserted  the  feudal 
power,  of  the  Papacy  in  the  Bull  Unam  sanctam  and  had  consequently  been 
arrested  by  the  representatives  of  France,  the  Papacy  experienced  a century  of 
banishment,  anarchy,  and  impotence,  while  in  the  following  century  the  Nor- 
man nobility  of  England  for  the  most  part  perished  in  the  contest  of  the  houses 
of  York  and  Lancaster  for  the  throne. 

IV 

What  this  fall  of  Papacy  and  Empire  meant  was  the  victory  of  State  over 
Estate.  At  the  root  of  the  feudal  system  there  had  been  the  feeling  that  the 
purpose  of  existence  was  that  a “life**  should  be  led  in  the  light  of  what  it 
meant.  History  was  exhaustively  comprised  in  the  destinies  of  noble  blood. 
But  now  the  feeling  sprang  up  that  there  was  something  else  besides,  something 
to  which  even  nobility  was  subordinate,  and  which  it  shared  with  all  other 
classes  (whether  of  status  or  of  vocation),  something  intangible,  an  idea. 
Events  came  to  be  viewed,  no  longer  from  a frankly  private-law  standpoint, 
but  under  a * ‘public '’-law  aspect.  The  State  might  (and  almost  without  ex- 
ception did)  remain  aristocratic  to  its  core;  its  outward  appearance  might  be 
scarcely  altered  by  the  transition  from  the  feudal  group  to  the  Class-State; 
the  idea  that  those  outside  the  Estates  possessed  rights  as  well  as  duties  might 
be  still  unknown;  hut  the  feeling  had  become  different,  and  the  consciousness 
that  Life  existed  to  be  lived  on  the  heights  of  history  had  given  way  to  the 
other  sentiment,  that  it  contained  a task.  The  difference  becomes  very  distinct 
when  we  contrast  the  policy  of  Rainald  van  Dassel  (d.  1167)  — one  of  the 
greatest  German  statesmen  of  all  periods  — with  that  of  the  Emperor  Charles  IV 
(d.  1378),  and  consider  in  parallel  therewith  the  transition  in  Classical  feeling 
from  the  “Themis”  of  the  knightly  age  to  the  “Dike”  of  the  growing  Polis.^ 
Themis  involves  only  a claim.  Dike  implies  a task  as  well. 

The  State-idea  in  its  sturdy  youth  is  always  — and  self-evidently,  with  a 
naturalness  rooted  deep  in  animality  itself — ^ bound  up  with  the  conception  of 
an  individual  ruler.  The  same  holds  good,  with  the  same  self-evidence,  for 
every  roused  crowd  in  every  decisive  situation  — as  every  riotous  assembly  and 
every  moment  of  sudden  danger  demonstrates  afresh,^  Such  crowds  are  units 

^ Sec  Ehrcaberg,  RecfojfAe  Gr«c&n#!W»  ^1511),  pp.  65,  et  seq. 

“ P.  18. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  377 

of  feeling,  but  blind.  They  are  “in  form”  for  the  onrush  of  events  only  when 
they  arc  in  the  hands , of  the  leader,  who  suddenly  appears  in  their  midst,  is 
set  at  the  head  in  a moment  by  that  very  unity  of  feeling,  and  finds-  an  uncondi- 
tional obedience.  This  process  repeats  itself  in  the  formation  of  the  great 
life-units  that  we  call  peoples  and  States,  only  more  slowly  and  with  surer 
, 7 meaning.  In  the  high  Cultures  it  is  -sometimes  set  aside  or  set  back  in  favour 
of  other  modes  of  being  “ in  form,”  for  the  sake  of  a great  symbol  and  artificially ; 
but  even  then  under  the  mask  of  these  forms  we  practicaliy  always  find  de  facto 
an  individual  rulership,  whether  it  be  that  of  a King's  adviser  or  a party  leader; 
and  in  every  revolutionary  upheaval  the  original  state  of  things  reappears. 

With  this  cosmic  fact  is  bound  up  one  of  the  most  intimately  inward  traits 
of  all  directional  life,  thC' inierited  which  presents  itself  with  the  force  of 
a natural  phenomenon  in  every  strong  race  and  compellingly  urges  even  the 
momentary  leader  (often  quite  unconsciously)  to  uphold  his  rank  for  the  dura- 
tion of  his  personal  existence  or,  beyond  it,  for  that  of  his  blood  streaming  on 
through  children  and  grandchildren.  The  same  deep  and  plantlike  trait  inspires 
eyery  real  following,  which  feels  in  the  continuance  of  the  blood  of  leadership 
both  a surety  for  and  a symbol  of  the  continuance  of  its  own.  It  is  precisely  in 
revolutions  that  this  primitive  instinct  comes  out,  full  and  strong  and  regardless 
of  all  principles.  Precisely  because  of  it  the  France  of  1800  saw  not  only  Na- 
poleon, but  also  his  hereditary  position,  as  the  true  fulfilment  of  the  Revolution. 
Theorists  who,  like  Marx  and  Rousseau,  start  from  conceptual  ideals  instead 
of  from  blood-facts  have  never  grasped  this  immense  force  that  dwells  in  the 
historical  world,  and  have  in  consequence  labelled  its  manifested  effects  as  dam- 
nable and  reactionary.  But  they  are  there,  and  with  a force  so  insistent  that 
even  the  symbolism  of  the  high  Cultures  can  only  override  them  temporarily 
and  artificially,  as  is  shown  in  the  engrossing  of  elective  officers  by  particular 
families  in  the  Classical,  and  the  nepotism  of  the  Baroque  popes  in  our  own 
case.  Behind  the  fact  that  leadership  is  very  often  freely  resigned,  and  the 
saying  that  “merit  should  rule,”  there  is  practically  always  the  rivalry  of 
magnates,  who  have  no  objection  of  principle  to  hereditary  rulership,  but 
prevent  it  in  practice  because  each  one  of  them  secretly  claims  it  for  his  own 
blood.  This  state  of  active,  creative  jealousy  is  the  foundation  on  which  the 
forms  of  Classical  oligarchy  are  built  up. 

The  combination  of  both, elements  produces  the  idea  of  Dynasty.  This  is  so 
deeply  rooted  in  the  Cosmic  and  so  closely  interwoven  into  the  factual  web  of 
historical  life  that  the  State-ideas  of  each  and  all  the  Cultures  are  modifications 
of  this  one  principle^  from  the  passionate  affirmative  of  the  Faustian  to  the  resolute 
negative  of  the  Classical  Soul.  The  ripening  of  the  State-idea  of  a Culture  is 
associated  with  the  city  and  even  the  adolescence  of  the  city.  Nations,  his- 
torical peoples,  are  town-building  peoples.^  The  capital  takes  the  place  of  the 

^ Pp.  X71,  ct  seq. 


378  ' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ; 

castle  and  the  palace  as  the  centre  of  high  history,  and  in  it  the  feeling  of  the 
exercise  of  power,  Themis,  transforms  itself  into  that  of  government,  Dike. 
Here  feudal  unity  is  inwardly  overcome  by  national,  even  in  the  consciousness 
of  the  First  Estate  itself,  and  here  the  bare  fact  of  rulership  elevates  itself  into 
the  sjt£A:)o\  ol  Sovereignty^ 

And  so,  with  the  sinking  of  feudalism,  Faustian  history  becomes  dynastic 
history.  From  little  centres  where  princely  families  have  their  seats  (whence 
they“ spring,”  as  the  phrase  goes,  reminding  us  of  plant  and  property),  the 
shaping  of  nations  proceeds  — nations  of  strictly  aristocratic  constitution,  but 
yet  so  that  the  State  conditions  the  being  of  the  Estate.  The  genealogical 
principle  already  ruling  in  the  feudal  nobility  and  the  yeoman  families,  the 
expression  of  the  feeling  for  expanse  and  the  will-to-history,  has  become  so 
powerful  that  the  appearance  of  nations  transcending  the  strong  unities  of 
language  and  landscape  is  dependent  upon  the  destinies  of  ruling  houses.  Mar- 
riages and  deaths  sever  or  unite  the  blood  of  whole  populations.^  Where  a 
Lotharingian  and  a Burgundian  dynasty  failed  to  take  shape,  there  also  nations 
already  embryonic  failed  to  develop.  The  doom  that  overhung  the  Hohen- 
staufen  involved  more  than  the  imperial  crown.  For  Germany  and  Italy  it 
meant  for  centuries  a deep  unsatisfied  longing  for  a united  German-Italian  nation, 
while  the  House  of  Habsburg,  on  the  contrary,  enabled,  not  a German,  but  an 
Austrian  nation  to  develop. 

In  the  Magian  world,  with  its  cavern-feeling,  the  dynastic  principle  was 
quite  otherwise  constituted.  The  Classical  princeps,  the  legitimate  successor  of 
tyrants  and  tribunes,  was  the  embodiment  of  the  Demos.  As  Janus  was  the  door 
and  Vesta  the  hearth,  so  Cassar  was  the  people.  He  was  the  last  creation  of 
Orphic  religiousness.  The  “Dominus  et  Deus,”  on  the  contrary,  was  Magian, 
a Shah  participating  in  the  divine  Fire  (the  hv arena  of  the  Mazdaist  empire  of 
the  Sassanids,  which  becomes  the  aureole  in  Pagan  and  Christian  Byzantium), 
which  radiates  about  him  and  makes  him  -piusy  felix,  invktus  (the  last-named, 
from  Commodus’s  reign,  his  official  title).^  In  Byzantium  in  the  third  century 
of  our  era  the  ruler-type  underwent  the  same  transition  as  was  implied  in  the 
taking-down  of  Augustus’s  civil-service  state  to  build  Diocletian’s  feudalism. 
“The new  creation  begun  by  Aurelian  and  Probus  and  built  up  on  the  ruins  by 
Diocletian  and  Constantine  was  about  as  alien  to  the  Classical  world  and  the 
principate  as  the  empire  of  Charlemagne.”  ® The  Magian  ruler  governed  the 
visible  portion  of  the  general  Consensus  of  the  orthodox,  which  was  Church, 

^ P.  i8i,  et  seq. 

2 F.  Cumont,  MysUrkn  der  Mithra  (1^16)^  PP*  74>  ct  seq.  The  Sassanid  government,  which 
about  A.D.  300  changed  from  the  feudal  union  to  the  aristocratic  State,  was  in  all  respects  the  pattern 
for  Byzantium  in  ceremonial,  in  the  knightly  character  of  its  Empire,  in  administrative  management, 
and  above  all  in  the  type  of  its  Ruler.  Cf.  also  A,  Christensen,  U Empire  des  Sassanides,  k peupk,  Vetat^ 
(Copenhagen,  1907). 

^ Ed.  Meyer,  K/.  Schriften^  p.  146. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY 


37'9 

State,  and  Nation  in  one/  as  Augustine  described  it  in  hh  Civitas  The 
Western  ruler  is  bj  the  grace  of  God  monarch  in  the  historical  world;  his  people 
is  subordinated  to  him  because  God  has  invested  him  with  it.  But  in  matters 
of  faith  he  is  himself  a subordinate  — to  God's  Vicar  on  earth,  or  to  his  own 
conscience,  as  the  case  may  be.  That  is  the  separation  of  State  authority  and 
Church  authority,  the  great  Faustian  conflict  between  Time  and  Space.  When, 
in  800,  the  Pope  crowned  the  Emperor,  he  chose  a new  ruler  for  himself  in  order 
that  he  himself  might  thrive.  Whereas  the  Emperor  in  Byzantium  was,  accord- 
ing to  Magian  world-feeling,  his  spiritual  as  well  as  his  secular  superior,  an 
Emperor  in  the  Frank  lands  was  his  servant  in  spiritual  matters,  besides  being 
(perhaps)  his  arm  in  secular  affairs.  As  an  idea,  the  Papacy  could  arise  only  by 
separation  from  the  Caliphate,  for  the  Pope  is  included  in  the  Caliph. 

For  this  very  reason,  however,  the  choice  of  the  Magian  ruler  cannot  be 
bound  down  to  a genealogical  succession-law.  It  issues  from  the  consensus  of 
the  ruling  blood-kindred,  out  of  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks  and  designates 
the  Chosen  One.  When  Theodosius  died,  in  550,  a relative,  the  nun  Pulcheria, 
formally  gave  her  hand  to  the  old  senator  Marcianus,  thereby  incorporating 
this  statesman  in  the  family  and  securing  the  throne  to  him  and  continuance  to 
the  dynasty";  ^ and  this  act,  like  many  similar  occurrences  in  the  Sassanid 
and  Abbassid  houses,  was  taken  as  the  outcome  of  a hint  from  above. 

In  China,  the  Emperor-idea  of  the  early  Chou  period,  which  was  strictly 
bound  up  with  feudalism,  soon  became  a dream,  which,  rapidly  and  with  in- 
creasing distinctness,  came  to  reflect  a whole  preceding  world  in  the  form  of 
three  dynasties  of  Emperors  and  myth-Emperors  more  ancient  still.®  But,  for 
the  dynasties  of  the  system  of  states  that  thereupon  grew  up  (in  which  the 
title  King,  Wangy  came  at  last  into  perfectly  general  use)  strict  rules  came  into 
force  for  royal  successions,  legitimacy  — a notion  quite  alien  to  the  early 
time  — became  a power  to  conjure  with, ^ and  extinction  of  lines,  adoptions  and 
misalliances  led,  as  in  the  Baroque  of  the  West,  to  innumerable  wars  of  succes- 
sion.® Some  principle  of  legitimacy,  too,  surely  underlay  the  remarkable 

^ See  p.  ^43.  ^ KrumbsLchcr,  p.  918. 

^ A bright  light  is  thrown  upon  the  formation  of  this  picture  by  the  fact  that  the  descendants 
of  the  repeatedly  overthrown  dynasties  of  Hia  and  Shang  reigned  in  the  states  of  Ki-Sung  throughout 
the  Ch6u  period  CSchindlcr,  Das  Frisstertum  im  altcn  China,  I,  p.  30).  This  shows,  firstly,  that  the 
picture  of  the  Empire  was  mirrored  back  on  some  earlier  or  even  perhaps  a contemporary  eminence 
of  these  states;  and,  secondly  and  above  all,  that  here  too  “dynasty”  was  not  what  we  currently 
mean  by  the  name,  but  followed  some  quite  different  idea  of  the  family.  We  may  compare  the 
fiction  which  made  the  German  King,  who  was  always  chosen  on  Frankish  territory  and  crowned  in 
the  sepulchral  chapel  of  Charlemagne,  into  a “Frank,”  so  that  if  circumstances  had  been  different, 
there  might  have  evolved  the  notion  of  a Frankish  dynasty  running  from  Charles  to  Conradin 
(see  Amira,  German.  Fjcht  in  Hcrm.  Paul,  Grundriss,  III,  p.  147,  note).  From  the  Confneian  age  of 
enlightenment  this  picture  became  the  basis  of  a State-theory,  and  later  still  it  was  turned  to  account 
by  the  Csesars  (p.  313). 

'^O.Fr2inkc,StudienriirGesch.d.Kjmfur..DogmaSr^p.X4frt2‘%i- 

® An  illuminating  example  is  the  “personal  union”  of  the  Ki  and  Tseng  states,  contested  as 
contrary  to  law  (Frankc,  op.  cit.,  p.  X5i. 


38o  the  decline  of  THE  WEST 

fact  that  the  rulers  of  the  Egyptian  Xllth  dynasty,  with  whom  the  late  period 
of  the  Culture  ended,  had  their  sons  crowned  during  their  own  lifetime.^  The 
inward  relationship  between  these  three  dynastic  ideas  is  yet  another  proof  that 
Being  in  these  three  Cultures  was  akin. 

It  requires  a close  insight  into  the  political  form-language  of  the  Classical 
world  to  perceive  that  here  also  the  course  of  things  was  exactly  the  same,  and 
that  it  comprised  not  only  the  transition  from  feudal  union  to  class-State,  but 
even  the  dynastic  principle  as  well.  Classical  being,  indeed,  said  no  to  every- 
thing that  might  draw  it  into  distances  either  of  space  or  of  time,  and  even  in 
the  fact-world  of  history  ringed  itself  with  creations  that  had  something  of 
the  defensive  in  them.  But  all  this  narrowing  and  curtailing  presupposes  the 
thing  against  which  it  is  striving  to  maintain  itself.  The  Dionysiac  squan- 
dering, and  the  Orphic  negation,  of  the  Classical  body  contained  in  the  very 
form  of  their  protest  the  Apollinian  ideal  of  perfect  bodily  being. 

Individual  rulership  and  the  will  to  transmit  to  heirs  were  unmistakably 
taken  for  granted  in  the  oldest  kingship.^  But  they  had  become  questionable 
even  by  800,  as  the  r61e  of  Telemachus  in  the  older  parts  of  the  Odyssey  indi- 
cates. The  royal  title  was  frequently  borne  by  great  vassals  and  the  most 
conspicuous  of  the  nobles.  In  Sparta  and  in  Lycia  there  were  two  of  them,  and 
in  the  Ph^eacian  city  of  the  epic  and  in  many  actual  cities  there  were  more. 
Next  comes  the  splitting-off  of  ofEces  from  dignities.  Lastly,  the  kingship 
itself  becomes  an  office  which  the  nobility  confers  (though  at  first,  perhaps, 
only  upon  members  of  the  old  royal  family);  thus  in  Sparta  the  Ephors,  as 
representing  the  First  Estate,  were  in  no  wise  limited  in  their  choice  by  rule; 
and  in  Corinth  from  about  750  the  royal  clan  of  the  Bacchiadas  abolished  heredi- 
tary succession,  and  on  each  occasion  set  up  a ptytaneus  with  royal  rank  from 
within  their  own  body.  The  great  offices,  which  likewise  were  hereditary  at 
first,  came  to  be  for  one  life  only,  then  were  limited  to  a term,  and  lastly  became 
annual,  and,  further,  were  so  arranged  that  there  were  more  holders  than  offices, 
and  the  leadership  was  exercised  by  each  in  turn  — the  custom  which,  as  is  well 
known,  led  to  the  disaster  of  Cannse.  These  annual  offices,  from  the  Etruscan 
annual  dictature  ^ to  the  Doric  ephorate  (which  is  found  in  Heraclea  and 
Messene  as  well  as  Sparta)  are  firmly  bound  up  with  the  essence  of  the  Polis, 
and  they  reach  their  full  structure  about  650.  Exactly  at  the  corresponding 
date  of  the  Western  class-State  (end  of  the  fifteenth  century),  the  hereditary 
power  of  dynasties  was  being  secured  by  the  Emperor  Maximilian  and  his 

q Ed.  Meyet,  GesS.  d.  Alt.,  I,  § i8i. 

2 G.  Busolt,  Griech.  Staatskunde  C^S^o),  pp.  319,  ct.  seq.  U.  voa  Wiiamowitz  (Staat  und 
Gmllschaft  der  Grkchen,  1310,  p.  53),  in  disputing  the  existence  of  the  patriarchal  kingdom,  mis- 
understands the  immense  difference  between  the  conditions  of  the  eighth  century,  indicated  in  the 
Odyssey,  and  those  of  the  tenth. 

® A.  Rosenberg,  (1313),  pp.  75,  et  seq. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  381 

marriage-politics  (against  the  claims  of  the  Electors),  by  Ferdinand  of  Aragon, 
Henry  VII  of  England,  and  Louis  XI  of  Franced 

But  with  the  increasing  emphasis  upon  the  Classical  here  and  now,  the 
priesthood,  which  had  the  beginnings  of  an  Estate  in  it,  became  pari  passu 
a mere  aggregate  of  city  officials.  The  capital,  so  to  call  it,  of  the  Homeric 
kingship,  instead  of  being  the  centre  for  the  radiation  of  State  influence  in  all 
directions  into  the  distance,  contracted  its  magic  circle  until  State  and  city 
became  identical.  Thereby,  of  course,  the  nobility  was  fused  with  the  pa- 
triciate, and  if  even  in  the  Gothic  the  representation  of  the  young  cities  (for 
example,  the  English  Commons  or  the  French  States-General)  was  exclusively 
by  patricians,  how  much  more  so  in  the  powerful  city-state  of  the  Classical! 
Not  indeed  in  idea,  but  in  jact^  it  was  a pure  kingless  aristocratic  State.  The 
strictly  Apollinian  **  form*' of  the  growing  Polis  is  called 

And  thus,  at  the  close  of  the  early  periods  of  both  these  Cultures,  we  see 
two  principles  parallel  and  contrasted,  the  Faustian-genealogical  and  the 
Apollinian-oligarchic;  two  kinds  of  constitutional  law,  of  Dike.  The  one  is 
supported  by  an  unmeasured  sense  of  expanse,  reaches  back  deep  into  the  past 
with  form-tradition,  thinks  forward  with  the  same  intense  will-to-endure  into 
the  remotest  future;  but  in  the  present,  too,  works  for  political  effectiveness 
over  broad  expanses  by  well-considered  dynastic  marriages  and  by  the  truly 
Faustian,  dynamic,  and  contrapuntal  politics  that  we  call  diplomacy.  The 
other,  wholly  corporeal  and  statuesque,  is  self-limited  by  its  policy  of  autarkeia 
to  the  nearest  and  the  most  immediate  present,  and  at  every  point  stoutly 
denies  that  which  Western  being  affirms. 

Both  the  dynastic  state  and  the  city-state  presuppose  the  city  itself.  But 
there  is  this  difference,  that  a seat  of  government  in  the  West,  though  it  may 
be  (and  frequently  is)  far  from  being  the  greatest  city  of  the  land,  is  a force- 
centre  in  a field  of  political  tensions  such  that  every  occurrence,  in  however 
remote  a corner,  vibrates  generally  throughout  the  whole  — whereas  in  the 
Classical,  life  huddles  closer  and  closer  until  it  reaches  the  grotesque  phe- 
nomenon of  Synoecism  — the  very  acme  of  the  Euclidean  will-to-form  in  the 
political  world.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine  the  State  unless  and  until  the  nation 
sits  physically  concentrated  in  one  heap,  as  one  body;  it  must  be  seen^  and  even 
seen  *'at  a glance."  And  while  the  Faustian  tendency  is  more  and  more  to  di- 
minish the  number  of  dynastic  centres  — so  that  even  Maximilian  I could  see 

^ Estate  or  Class  was  the  basis,  too,  of  the  two  great  political  associations  in  Byzantium,  which 
arc  quite  wrongly  described  as  ‘ ‘ Circus  parties.  * * These  Blues  and  Greens  called  themselyes  ‘ ‘ Demoi 
and  had  their  regular  leaders.  The  circus  was  simply  like  the  Palais  Royal  of  1789,  the  scene  of 
public  manifestations,  and  behind  them  were  the  class-associations  of  the  Senate.  When  in  $2.0 
Anastasius  I gave  effect  to  the  Monophysite  tendency,  the  Greens  sang  orthodox  hymns  all  day  there, 
and  so  forced  the  Emperor  publicly  to  cry  off.  The  Western  counterpart  to  this  is  formed  by  the  Pari- 
sian parties  under  the  “three  Henries”  (1580),  thcGuelphs  and  Ghibellincs  of  Savonarola’s  Florence, 
and  above  all  the  insurgent  faction  in  Rome  under  Pope  Eugene  IV.  The  suppression  of  the  Nika 
Rebellion  by  Justinian  in  was  thus  also  the  foundation  of  State-absolutism  vis-a-vis  the  Estates. 


38x  - ■ THE  . DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

loommg  in  the  distance  a dynastically  secure  universal  monarchy  of  his  house  — 
the  Classical  world  fell  apart  into  innumerable  petty  points,  which,  almost  as 
soon  as  they  came  into  existence,  started  to  do  that  which  for  Classical  mankind 
was  almost  a necessity  of  thought  and  the  purest  expression  of  autarkeia  — to 
destroy  one  another.^ 

Synoecism  with  its  consequence,  the  creation  of  the  Polis-type  proper, 
was  exclusively  the  work  of  aristocracy.  It  was  they  that  established  the  Clas- 
sical city-state,  and  for  themselves  alone;  it  was  the  drawing-together  of  coun- 
try nobility  and  patriciate  that  brought  it  into  form.  The  vocational  classes 
were  already  on  the  spot,  and  the  peasantry  ceased  to  count  from  the  class 
point  of  view.  And  by  the  concentration  of  noble  power  at  one  point  the 
kingship  of  the  feudal  period  was  shattered. 

With  these  glimpses  into  Greece  to  go  upon,  we  may  venture,  though  under 
all  reserves  of  course,  to  outline  the  history  of  primitive  Rome.  The  Roman 
synoecism  — the  assembling  of  widely  scattered  noble  families  — - is  identical 
with  the  “founding”  of  the  city,  an  Etruscan  undertaking  of  the  beginning  of 
the  seventh  century.^  Facing  the  royal  stronghold  of  the  Capitol,  there  had  long 
been  two  other  settlements  on  the  Palatine  and  the  Quirinal.  To  the  first 
of  these  belonged  the  ancient  goddess  Diva  Rumina  ^ and  the  Etruscan  Ruma 
clan;  ^ the  god  of  the  second  was  Quirinus  Pater.  From  these  comes  the  dual 
name  of  Romans  and  “Quirites,”  and  the  dual  priesthoods  of  the  Salii  and 
Luperei,  which  adhered  to  the  two  hills.  Now,  as  the  three  blood-tribes 
named  Ramnes,  Titles,  and  Luceres  are  in  all  probability  common  to  all  Etruscan 
localities,®  they  must  have  existed  in  both  of  those  which  concern  us  here;  and 
thus  are  explained,  on  the  one  hand,  the  number  six  of  centuries  of  equites,  of 
military  tribunes,  of  aristocratic  Vestals,  and,  on  the  other,  the  number  two 
of  the  prxtors  (or  consuls)  who  were,  quite  early,  attached  to  the  King  as 
representatives  of  the  nobles  and  gradually  deprived  him  of  all  influence. 
Already  by  600  the  constitution  of  Rome  must  have  been  a strong  oligarchy  of 
“Patres”  with  a shadow-kingship  ® as  figure-head.  Thus  both  the  older  theory 
of  an  expulsion  of  the  kings,  and  the  newer  of  a slow  disintegration  of  the  royal 
power,  can  stand  side  by  side  after  all,  the  former  as  referring  to  the  fall  of  the 
Tarquinian  Tyrannis,  which  (as  everywhere  else  in  the  Classical  world — 
Pisistratus  in  Athens,  for  example)  had  set  itself  up  in  opposition  to  the  oli- 

^ This  contrast  gives  rise  to  a corresponding  contrast  in  idea  of  colonization.  Whereas,  c.g., 
the  Prussian  sovereigns  invited  settlers  to  their  land  (Salzburg  Protestants,  French  Huguenots), 
Gelon  forcibly  transferred  the  populations  of  whole  cities  into  Syracuse,  which  thus  became  the 
first  megalopolis  of  the  Classical  world  (r.  480). 

2 The  Greek  lecythi  found  in  graves  on  the  Esquiline  date  form  this  period. 

® Wissowa,  p.  X42.. 

* W.  Schulze,  Zur  Geschichte  lateinischm  Eipnnamn,  pp,  379,  ct.  scq.,  580,  ct  seq. 

'Seep.  351. 

® This  is  seen  also  in  the  relation  of  the  Ponfifex  Maximus  to  the  pex  Sacrorum  — the  latter  with 
the  three  great  Flamens  to  the  kingship,  the  Pontifices  and  the  Vestals  to  the  aristocracy. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  383 

gafchj  about  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century;  the  latter  as  referring  to  the  slow 
disintegration  of  the  feudal  power  of  the  (may  we  say)  Homeric  kingship  by 
the  aristocratic  city-state,  before  the  foundation,”  so-called  — the  crisis, 
probably,  in  which  the  prxtors  emerged,  as  the  Archons  and  Ephors  emerged 
.■elsewhere.. 

This  Polis  was  no  less  strictly  aristocratic  than  the  Western  class-State, 
with  its  nobility,  clergy,  and  higher  burgesses.  The  residue  of  the  people 
belonging  to  it  was  merely  its  object,  but  — in  the  West  the  object  of  its  political 
care,  md  in  the  Classical  the  object  of  its  political  carelessness.  For  here  **Carfe 
diem*  was  the  motto  of  the  oligarchy  as  well  as  of  others.  It  proclaims  itself 
aloud  in  the  poems  of  Theognis  and  the  Song  of  Hybrias  the  Cretan.  It  made 
Classical  finance  till  right  into  its  latest  phases  — from  the  piracy  practised 
by  Polycrates  upon  his  own  people  to  the  proscriptions  of  the  Roman  Triumvirs 

— into  a more  or  less  hand-to-mouth  seizing  of  resources  for  the  moment.  In 
jurisprudence  it  emerges  with  unparalleled  logic  in  the  limitation  of  Roman 
edict-law  to  the  term  of  office  of  the  one-year  prxtor.^  And,  lastly,  it  is  seen  in 
the  ever-growing  practice  of  filling  military,  legal,  and  administrative  offices 
(particularly  the  more  important  of  them)  by  lot  — a kind  of  homage  to  Tyche, 
the  goddess  of  the  Moment. 

This  was  the  Classical  world’s  manner  of  being  politically  ”in  form”  and, 
correspondingly,  of  thinking  and  feeling.  There  are  no  exceptions.  The  Etrus- 
cans were  as  much  under  its  domination  as  the  Dorians  and  the  Macedonians.^ 
When  Alexander  and  his  successors  dotted  the  Orient  far  and  wide  with  their 
Hellenistic  cities,  they  did  so  without  conscious  choice,  for  they  could  not 
imagine  any  other  form  of  political  organization.  Antioch  was  to  be  Syria,  and 
Alexandria  Egypt.  The  latter,  under  the  Ptolemies  and  later  under  the  Cassars, 
was,  not  indeed  legally,  but  certainly  in  practice,  a Polls  on  a vast  scale — 
for  the  country  outside,  long  reverted  to  townless  fellahdom  and  managed  by 
immemorial  precedents,  stood  at  its  gates  like  an  alien  frontier.®  The  Roman 
Imperium  was  nothing  but  the  last  and  greatest  Classical  city-state  standing 
on  foundations  of  a colossal  synoecism.  Under  Marcus  Aurelius  the  rhetor 
Aristides  could  say  with  perfect  justification  that  it  had  “brought  together 
this  world  in  the  name  of  one  city:  wheresoever  a man  may  be  born  in  it,  it  is  at 
its  centre  that  he  dwells.”  Even  the  conquered  populations  of  the  Empire 

— the  wandering  desert-tribes,  the  upland-valley  communities  of  the  Alps  — 
were  constituted  as  civitates.  Livy  thinks  invariably  in  the  forms  of  the  city- 
state,  and  for  Tacitus  provincial  history  simply  does  not  exist.  When,  in 
49,  Pompey,  withdrawing  before  Cassar,  gave  up  Rome  as  militarily  unimpor- 
tant and  betook  himself  to  the  East  to  create  there  a firm  base  of  operations,  he 

^ Sec  p.  6z,  ct  seq. 

^ P.  173,  et  seq. 

3 This  is  clearly  to  be  seen  from  Wilckcn,  Grund%ugt  der  Papyruskmde  (1911),  pp.  i,  ct  seq. 


THE. DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  . 

was  doomed.  Giving  up  the  city,  he  had,  in  the  eyes  of  the  ruling  classes, 
given  up  the  State.  To  them  Rome  was  all . ^ 

These  city-states  were  in  principle  inextensible.  Their  number  could  in- 
crease, but  not  their  ambit.  The  notion  that  the  transformation  of  the  Roman 
clkntela  into  a YOting  flebs^  and  the  creation  of  the  country  tribes,  meant  a 
breach  in  the  Polis-idea  is  incorrect.  It  was  in  Rome  as  in  Attica  — the  whole 
life  of  the  State  remained  as  before  limited  to  one  point,  which  was  the  Agora, 
the  Forum.  However  far  away  those  to  whom  citizenship  was  granted  might 
live  — in  Hannibal’s  day  it  might  be  anywhere  in  Italy,  and  later  anywhere  in 
the  world  — the  exercise  of  his  political  right  depended  upon  personal  presence  in 
the  Forum.  Hence  the  majority  of  the  citizens  were,  not  legally,  but  practically 
without  influence  in  political  business.^  What  citizenship  meant  for  them, 
therefore,  was  simply  the  duty  of  military  service  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  city’s 
domestic  law.®  But  even  for  the  citizen  coming  to  Rome,  political  power  was 
limited  by  a second  and  artificial  synoecism  which  came  into  existence  after,  and 
as  the  result  of,  enfranchisement  of  the  peasant,  and  can  only  be  understood 
as  an  unconscious  effort  to  maintain  the  idea  of  the  Polis  strictly  unimpaired; 
the  new  citizens  were  inscribed,  regardless  of  their  numbers,  in  a very  few 
tribes  (eight,  under  the  Lex  Julia),  and  were  always,  therefore,  in  a minority 
in  the  Comitia  relatively  to  the  citizens  of  the  older  franchise. 

And  naturally  so,  for  this  civitas  was  regarded  through  and  through  as  one 
body,  a erw/xa.  That  which  did  not  belong  to  it  was  out  of  its  law,  hostis.  The 
gods  and  the  heroes  stood  above,  the  slave  (not  quite  to  be  called  human, 
according  to  Aristotle)  below,  this  aggregate  of  persons.^  But  the  individual 
was  a iibov  tvoKctlkov  in  a sense  that  would  be  regarded  by  us,  who  think  and 
live  in  our  expanse-feeling,  as  an  utter  slavery;  he  existed  only  by  reason  of  his 
membership  of  an  individual  Polis.  Owing  to  this  Euclidean  feeling,  the 
nobility  as  a self-contained  body  was  at  first  synonymous  with  the  Polis  — 
to  such  an  extent,  indeed,  that  even  in  the  Twelve  Tables  marriage  between 
patricians  and  plebeians  was  forbidden  and  the  Spartan  Ephors  began  their 

^ 'E^.  M.CYCT,  Casars  Monarchie 

2 Plutarch  and  Appian  describe  the  masses  of  humanity  that  moved  in  by  all  the  roads  of  Italy 
to  vote  on  Tiberius  Gracchus’s  land-bills.  But  this  in  itself  shows  that  nothing  of  the  sort  had  ever 
happened  before;  and  immediately  after  his  violence  upon  Octavius,  Tiberius  Gracchus  saw  down- 
fall staring  him  in  the  face  because  the  masses  had  streamed  off  home  again  and  were  not  to  be  as- 
sembled a second  time.  In  Cicero’s  day  a Comitia  often  consisted  only  in  speeches  by  a few  poli- 
ticians, without  participation  by  others;  but  never  did  it  occur  to  a Roman  to  transfer  the  place  of 
voting  to  the  residence  of  the  individual  voter  — nor  even  to  the  Italians  when  they  were  fighting 
for  citizenship  in  90  B.c.  So  strong  was  the  feeling  of  the  Polis. 

^ In  the  Western  dynasty-states  the  domestic  law  of  each  is  valid  for  its  and  applies 

therefore  to  ail  persons  present  therein,  irrespective  of  allegiance.  In  the  city-state,  on  the  contrary, 
the  validity  of  its  domestic  law  for  a person  arises  from  that  person’s  possession  of  citizenship; 
civitas^  therefore,  means  infinitely  more  than  present-day  nationality,  for  without  it  a man  was 
without  rights  at  all  — as  a “person,”  non-existent. 

^ Sec  p.  60, 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  385: 

term  of  office,  according  to  ancient  custom,  with  a declaration  of  war  against 
the  Helots.  The  relation  was  reversed  whenever  in  consequence  of  a revolution 
the  non-noble  became  the  Demos  — but  its  meaning  remained.  As  in  inward, 
so  also  in  outward  relationships,  the  body  politic  was  the  foundation  of  all 
events  throughout  Glassical  history.  The  cities,  hundreds  of  them,  lay  in  wait 
for  each  other,  each  as  self-gathered,  politically  and  economically,  as  it  was 
possible  to  make  it,  ready  to  bite,  letting  fly  on  the  smallest  excuse,  and  having 
as  its  war-aim,  not  the  extension  of  its  own  state,  but  the  extinction  of  the 
other  side's.  Wars  ended  with  the  destruction  of  the  enemy’s  city  and  the 
killing  or  enslavement  of  his  citizens,  just  as  revolutions  ended  with  the  mas- 
sacre or  expulsion  of  the  losers  and  the  confiscation  of  their  property  by  the 
victorious  party.  The  natural  interstate  condition  of  the  West  is  a close  net- 
work of  diplomatic  relations,  which  may  be  broken  through  by  wars;  but  the 
Classical  law  of  nations  assumes  war  as  a normal  condition,  interrupted  from 
time  to  time  by  peace  treaties,  and  a declaration  of  war  merely  re-established  the 
natural  state  of  policy.  Only  so  do  the  forty-  and  fifty-year  peace  treaties, 
spndai  (such  as  the  famous  one  of  Nicias  in  4x1),  become  intelligible,  as  tempo- 
rary guarantee-treaties. 

These  two  State-forms,  with  the  styles  of  policy  appropriate  to  each,  are 
assured  by  the  close  of  the  Early  period.  The  State-idea  has  triumphed  over 
the  feudal  union,  but  it  is  the  Estates  that  carry  that  idea,  and  the  nation 
has  political  existence  only  as  their  sum. 

'V 

With  the  beginning  of  the  Late  period  there  is  a decisive  turn,  where  city 
and  country  are  in  equilibrium  and  the  powers  proper  to  the  city,  money  and 
brains,  have  become  so  strong  that  they  feel  themselves,  as  non-estate,  an  equal 
match  for  the  old  Estates.  It  is  the  moment  when  the  State-idea  finally  rises 
superior  to  the  Estates  and  begins  to  set  up  in  their  -place  the  concept  of  the  Na- 
tion. 

The  State  has  fought  and  won  to  its  rights  along  a line  of  advance  from  feudal 
union  to  the  aristocratic  State.  In  the  latter  the  Estates  exist  only  with  reference 
to  the  State,  instead  of  vice  versa,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  disposition  of 
things  is  such  that  the  Government  only  meets  the  governed  nation  when  and 
in  so  far  as  the  nation  is  class-ordered.  Everyone  belongs  to  the  nation,  but 
only  an  elite  to  the  classes,  and  these  alone  count  politically. 

But  the  nearer  the  State  approaches  its  pure  form,  and  the  more  it  becomes 
absolute  — that  is,  independent  of  any  other  form-ideal  — the  more  heavily  the 
concept  of  the  nation  tells  against  that  of  .class,  and  there  comes  a moment  when 
the  nation  is  governed  as  such^  and  distinctions  of  “standing”  become  purely 
social.  Against  this  evolution  — which  is  one  of  the  necessities  of  the  Culture, 
inevitable,  irrevocable  — the  old  noble  and  priestly  classes  make  one  more 


386'  : ; ’ THE,  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

effort  of  resistance.  For  them,  now ^ everything  is  at  stake  — the  heroic  and  the 
saintly,  the  old  law,  rank,  blood  — and,  from  their  point  of  view,  against  what? 

In  the  West  this  struggle  of  the  old  Estates  against  the  State-power  took  the 
form  of  the  Fronde.  In  the  Classical  world,  where  there  was  no  dynasty  to 
represent  the  future  and  the  aristocracy  alone  had  political  existence,  we  find 
that  a dynastic  or  quasi-dynastic  embodiment  of  the  State-idea  sictmllj  formed 
itself,  and,  supported  by  the  non-privileged  part  of  the  nation,  raised  this  latter 
for  the  first  time  to  power.  That  was  the  mission  of  theTjr^s'w^^ir. 

In  this  change  from  the  class-State  to  the  absolute  State,  which  allowed  no 
measures  of  validity  but  its  own,  the  dynasties  of  the  West  — and  those  of 
Egypt  and  of  China  likewise  — called  the  non-estate  to  their  aid,  thereby  recog- 
nising it  as  a -political  quantity.  Herein  lies  the  real  importance  of  the  struggle 
against  the  Fronde,  in  which,  initially,  the  powers  of  the  greater  cities  could 
not  but  see  advantage  to  themselves,  for  here  the  ruler  was  standing  forth  in  the 
name  of  the  State,  the  care  of  all,  and  he  was  fighting  the  nobility  because  it 
wanted  to  uphold  the  Estate  zs  a political  magnitude. 

In  the  Polis,  on  the  contrary,  where  the  State  consisted  exclusively  in  the 
form  and  embodied  no  hereditary  head,  the  necessity  of  bringing  out  the  un- 
classed  on  behalf  of  the  State-idea  produced  the  Tyrannis,  in  which  a family 
or  a faction  of  the  nobility  itself  assumed  the  dynastic  role,  without  which 
action  on  the  part  of  the  Third  Estate  would  have  been  impossible.  Late 
Classical  historians  were  too  remote  from  this  process  to  seize  its  meaning, 
and  dealt  with  it  merely  in  terms  of  externals  of  private  life.  In  reality,  the 
Tyrannis  wzs  the  State,  and  oligarchy  opposed  it  under  the  banner  of  class, 
it  rested,  therefore,  upon  the  support  of  peasants  and  burghers  — in  Athens 
(r.  580)  the  Diakrii  and  Paralii  parties.  Therefore,  again,  it  backed  the  Diony- 
siac  and  Orphic  cults  against  the  Apollinian;  thus  in  Attica  Pisistratus  forced 
the  worship  of  Dionysus  ^ on  the  peasantry,  in  Sicyon  Clisthenes  forbade  the 
recital  of  the  Homeric  poems, ^ and  in  Rome  it  was  almost  certainly  in  the  time 
of  the  Tarquins  that  the  trinity  Demeter  (Ceres)-Dionysus-Kore  was  intro- 
duced.® Its  temple  was  dedicated  in  483  by  Spurius  Cassius,  the  same  who 
perished  later  in  an  attempt  to  reintroduce  the  Tyrannis.  The  Ceres  temple 
was  the  sanctuary  of  the  Plebs,  and  its  managers,  the  asdiles,  were  their  trusted 
spokesmen  before  the  tribunate  was  ever  heard  of.'*  The  Tyrants,  like  the 
princes  of  the  Western  Baroque,  were  liberals  in  a broad  sense  of  the  word 
that  ceased  to  be  possible  for  them  in  the  subsequent  stage  of  bourgeois  domi- 
nance. But  the  Classical  also  began  at  that  time  to  pass  round  the  word  that 

^ Gercke-Norden,  EinL  i.d. 

^ Bnsolt,  Griech.  Geschichu,  11,  pp.  346,  ct  scq. 

® Cf.  pp.  ^82.  and  305.  Fronde  and  Tyrannis  have  as  intimate  a connexion  with  Puritanism  — 
the  same  epochal  phase,  but  in  the  religious  instead  of  the  political  world —•  as  the  Reformation 
with  the  aristocratic  State,  and  the  “Second  Religiousness  with  Carsarism. 

* G.  Wissowa,  ^err  Rwwtff,  pp,  197,  ctseq. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  387 

money  inakcs  the  man  CxPvmr*  "avripy*  ^ The  sixth-century  Tyrannis  brought 
the  Polis-idca  to  its  conclusions  and  created  the  constitutional  concept  of  the 
Citmen,  the  PditeSy  the  Cims,  the  sum  of  these,  irrespective  of  their  class- 
provenance,  forming  the  soma  of  the  city-state.  When,  therefore,  the  oligarchy 
contrived  to  win  after  all  — thanks  once  more  to  the  Classical  craving  for  the 
present,  and  the  consequent  fear  and  hatred  evoked  by  the  quasi-will-to-dura- 
tion  of  the  dynasts  — the  concept  of  the  citizen  was  there,  firmly  established, 
and  the  non-patrician  had  learned  to  regard  himself  sls  an  estate  a “rest.” 

He  had  become  a political  party  — the  word  “democracy”  (in  its  specifically 
Classical  sense)  now  acquired  a really  serious  content  — and  what  he  set  him- 
self to  do  was,  no  longer  to  come  to  the  aid  of  the  State,  but  to  be  himself  the 
State  as  the  nobility  had  been  before.  He  began  to  count  — money  and  heads, 
for  the  money-census  and  the  general  franchise  are  alike  bourgeois  weapons  — 
whereas  an  aristocracy  does  not  count,  but  values,  and  votes  not  by  heads,  but  by 
classes.  As  the  absolute  State  came  out  of  Fronde  and  First  Tyrannis,  so  it  per- 
ished in  French  Revolution  and  Second  Tyrannis.  In  this  second  conflict, 
which  is  already  one  of  defence,  the  dynasty  returns  to  the  side  of  the  nobility 
in  order  to  guard  the  State-idea  against  a new  class-rule,  that  of  the  bourgeois. 

In  Egypt,  too,  the  period  between  Fronde  and  Revolution  is  hall-marked. 
It  is  the  Middle  Kingdom.  The  Xllth  Dynasty  (1000-1788)  — in  particular 
Amenemhet  I and  Sesostris  I — had  established  the  absolute  State  in  severe 
conflicts  with  the  baronage.  The  first  of  these  rulers,  as  a famous  poem  of  the 
time  relates,  barely  escaped  from  a court  conspiracy,  and  the  biography  of 
Sinuhet  ^ shows  us  that  after  his  death,  which  was  kept  secret  for  a time,  re- 
bellion threatened.  The  third  was  murdered  by  palace  officials.  We  learn  from 
the  inscriptions  in  the  family  grave  of  the  earl  Chmenotep  ^ that  the  cities  had 
become  rich  and  almost  independent,  and  warred  with  each  other.  Certainly 
they  cannot  have  been  smaller  at  that  time  than  the  Greek  cities  at  the  time  of 
the  Persian  Wars.  It  was  on  them  and  on  a certain  number  of  loyal  magnates  that 
the  dynasty  rested.^  Finally,  Sesostris  III  (1887-1850)  succeeded  in  completely 
abolishing  feudal  nobility.  Thenceforward  there  was  only  a court-nobility 
and  a single,  admirably  ordered  bureau-State;  ® but  already  some  lamented 
that  people  of  standing  were  reduced  to  misery  and  that  the  “sons  of  nobodies” 
enjoyed  rank  and  consideration.®  Democracy  was  beginning  and  the  great 
social  evolution  of  the  Hyksos  period  was  brewing. 

The  corresponding  place  in  China  is  that  of  the  Ming-  Chu  (or  Pa,  685- 

^ Beloch,  Grkch,  Gtschichu^  I,  i,  p.  354. 

® Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch,  d.  Alt.,  § x8i. 

® Ibid.,  §§  x8o,  ct  scq. 

^ On  the  means  taken  to  secure  the  succession,  cf.  p.  375. 

» Ed.  Meyer,  op.  cit.,  § x86. 

® Ibid.,  § 2.83.  A.  Erman,  Die  Mahnworte  eines  dgypischen  Propheten  (Sitz^  Preusf.  Akad.,  1919,  pp. 
804,  ct  seq. 


388  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

551).  These  were  Protectors  of  princely  origin,  who  exercised  an  unconstitu- 
tional, but  none  the  less  real,  power  over  a world  of  states  weltering  in  anarchy, 
and  called  congresses  of  princes  for  the  restoration  of  order  and  the  recognition 
of  stable  political  principles,  even  summoning  the  “Ruler  of  the  Middle*' 
himself  (now  become  totally  unimportant)  out  of  the  house  of  Chou,  The 
first  was  Hwang  of  Tsi  (d.  645),  who  called  the  Diet  of  659  and  of  whom 
Confucius  wrote  that  he  had  rescued  China  from  a reversion  to  barbarism.  Their 
name  Ming-Chu  became  later,  like  the  word  “tyrant,”  a term  of  obloquy, 
because  later  men  were  unwilling  to  see  in  the  phenomenon  anything  but  a 
power  unauthori2:ed  by  law  — but  it  is  beyond  all  question  that  these  great 
diplomatists  were  an  element  working  with  a devoted  care  for  the  State  and  the 
historical  future  against  the  old  Estates,  and  supported  by  the  young  classes 
of  mind  and  money.  It  is  a high  Culture  that  speaks  to  us  in  the  little  that  we 
so  far  know  about  them  from  Chinese  sources.  Some  were  writers;  others 
selected  philosphers  to  be  their  ministers.  It  is  a matter  of  indifference  whether 
we  mentally  parallel  them  with  Richelieu  or  with  Wallenstein  or  with  Peri- 
ander  — in  any  case  it  is  with  them  that  the  “people”  first  emerges  as  a po- 
litical quantity.^  It  is  the  outlook  and  high  diplomacy  of  genuine  Baroque  — 
the  absolute  State  sets  itself  up  in  principle  as  the  opponent  of  the  aristocratic 
State,  and  wins  through. 

In  this  lies  the  close  parallelism  of  these  events  with  the  Fronde  of  Western 
Europe.  In  France  the  Crown  after  1614  ceased  to  summon  the  States-General, 
this  body  having  shown  itself  to  be  too  strong  for  the  united  forces  of  State 
and  bourgeoisie.  In  England  Charles  I similarly  tried  to  govern  without 
Parliament  after  i6i8.  In  Germany,  at  the  same  time,  the  Thirty  Years'  War 
broke  out.  The  magnitude  of  its  religious  significance  is  apt  to  overshadow 
for  us  the  other  issue  involved,  and  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  it  was  also  an 
effort  to  bring  to  a decision  the  struggle  between  imperial  power  and  the  Fronde 
of  the  great  electors,  and  that  between  the  individual  princes  and  the  lesser 
Frondes  of  their  local  estate-assemblies.  But  the  centre  of  world-politics  then 
lay  in  Spain,  There,  in  conjunction  with  the  high  courtesies  generally,  the 
diplomatic  style  of  the  Baroque  had  evolved  in  the  cabinet  of  Philip  II;  and  the 
dynastic  principle  — which  embodied  the  absolute  State  the  Cortes  — 

had  attained  to  its  highest  development  in  the  course  of  the  long  struggle  with 
the  House  of  Bourbon.  The  attempt  to  align  England  also  in  the  Spanish  system 
had  failed  under  Philip  II,  when  Queen  Mary,  his  wife,  was  disappointed  of  an 
heir  already  expected  and  announced.  But  now,  under  Philip  IV,  the  idea  of  a 
universal  monarchy  spanning  the  oceans  revived- — no  longer  the  mystic 
dream-monarchy  of  the  early  Gothic,  the  “ Holy  Roman  Empire,  German  by 
nation,”  but  the  tangible  ideal  of  a world-dominion  in  Habsburg  hands,  which 

^ S.  Plath,  Verfassung  und  Vcrevaltung  Chinas  (^Ahh.  Munch.  Ak.y  1864),  p.  97,  O.  Frankc,  Studien 
Gesch,  d.  Konfusc.  Dogmas,  pp.  2.^^,  et  scq. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  389 

was  to  centre  in  Madrid  and  to  have  the  solid  possession  of  India  and  America 
and  the  already  sensible  power  of  money  as  its  foundations.  It  was  at  this  time, 
too,  that  the  Stuarts  were  tempted  to  secure  their  endangered  position  by 
marrying  the  heir  of  the  English  and  Scottish  thrones  to  a Spanish  Infanta; 
but  in  the  end  Madrid  preferred  to  link  itself  with  its  own  collateral  line  in 
Vienna,  and  so  James  I readdressed  his  marriage-alliance  proposals  to  the 
opposition  party  of  the  Bourbons.  The  futile  complications  of  this  family 
policy  contributed  more  than  anything  else  to  bind  the  Puritan  movement  and 
the  English  Fronde  into  one  great  Revolution. 

In  these  great  decisions  the  actual  occupants  of  the  thrones  were  — as  in 
‘‘contemporary’*  China  — only  secondary  figures  compared  with  great  in- 
dividual statesmen,  in  whose  hands  the  fate  of  the  West  rested  for  whole  decades. 
Olivarez  in  Madrid  and  the  Spanish  Ambassador  Onate  in  Vienna  were  then  the 
most  powerful  personages  in  Europe.  Their  opponents  were  Wallenstein, 
standing  for  the  Empire-idea  in  Germany,  and  Richelieu,  standing  for  the 
absolute  State  in  France  — and  these  were  succeeded  a little  later  by  Mazarin 
in  France,  Cromwell  in  England,  Oldenbarneveldt  in  Holland,  Oxenstierna 
in  Sweden.  Not  until  the  Great  Elector  of  Brandenburg  do  we  meet  again  a 
monarch  having  political  importance  of  his  own. 

Wallenstein,  unconsciously,  began  where  the  Hohenstaufen  had  stopped. 
Since  the  death  of  Frederick  II,  in  1x50,  the  power  of  the  Estates  of  the  Empire 
had  become  unlimited,  and  it  was  against  them,  and  as  champion  of  an  ab- 
solute emperor’s  state,  that  he  fought  during  the  first  tenure  of  command. 
Had  he  been  a greater  diplomatist,  had  he  been  clearer  and  above  all  more 
resolute  (for  actually  he  was  timid  in  the  presence  of  decisive  turnings),  and  had 
he,  in  particular,  taken  the  trouble  as  Richelieu  did  to  bring  the  person  of  the 
monarch  under  his  influence  — • then  probably  it  would  have  been  all  up  with 
princedom  within  the  Empire.  He  saw  in  these  princes  rebels,  to  be  unseated 
and  dispossessed  of  their  lands;  at  the  peak  of  his  power  (end  of  16x9),  when 
militarily  he  held  Germany  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  he  said  aloud  in  con- 
versation that  the  Emperor  ought  to  be  master  in  the  Empire  as  the  Kings 
of  France  and  Spain  were  masters  of  their  own.  His  army,  which  was  “self- 
supporting”  and  by  reason  of  its  numbers  also  independent  of  the  Estates,  was 
the  first  instance  in  German  history  of  an  Imperial  army  of  European  signifi- 
cance; in  comparison  with  it  Tilly’s  army  of  the  Fronde  (for  that  was  what 
the  League  really  was)  counted  for  little.  When  Wallenstein,  in  1618,  leaguered 
before  Stralsund,  visualizing  a Habsburg  sea-power  in  the  Baltic  wherewith  to 
take  the  Bourbon  system  in  the  rear  — and  just  then  Richelieu  was  besieging 
La  Rochelle,  with  better  fortune  — hostilities  between  himself  and  the  League 
had  become  almost  unavoidable.  He  absented  himself  from  the  Diet  of  Regens- 
burg in  1630,  saying  that  its  seat  “would  presently  be  in  Paris.”  This  was  the 
most  serious  political  error  of  his  life,  for  in  his  absence  the  Frondist  Electors 


^ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ^ ^ ^ ^ 

defeated  the  Emperor  by  threatening  to  displace  him  in  favour  of  Louis  XIII, 
and  forced  him  to  dismiss  his  general.  And  with  that,  though  it  did  not  realize 
the  consequence  of  the  step,  the  central  power  in  Germany  gave  away  its  army. 
Henceforth  Richelieu  supported  the  greater  Fronde  in  Germany  with  the 
object  of  breaking  the  Spanish  power  there,  while  on  the  other  side  Olivarez, 
and  Wallenstein  as  soon  as  he  regained  his  power,  allied  themselves  with  the 
French  aristocrats,  who  thereupon  took  the  offensive  under  the  Queen-mother 
and  Gaston  of  Orleans.  But  the  Imperial  power  had  missed  its  grand  chance. 
The  Cardinal  won  in  both  games.  In  i63x  he  executed  the  last  of  the  Mont- 
morencys  ^ and  brought  the  Catholic  Electors  of  Germany  into  open  alliance 
with  France.  And  thenceforward  Wallenstein,  becoming  unsure  of  his  own 
final  purposes,  leaned  more  and  more  against  the  Spanish  idea,  thinking  that 
he  could  keep  the  Empire-idea  clear  of  it,  and  so  ipso  facto  approached  nearer 
and  nearer  to  the  standpoint  of  the  Estates  — like  Marshal  Turenne  in  the 
French  Fronde  a few  years  later.  This  was  the  decisive  turn  in  later  German  history. 
With  Wallenstein’s  secession  the  absolute  emperor-state  became  impossible, 
and  his  murder  in  1634  did  not  remedy  matters,  for  the  Emperor  had  no  substi- 
tute to  take  his  place. 

And  yet  it  was  just  then  that  the  conjuncture  was  favourable  once  more. 
For  in  1640  the  decisive  conflict  between  Crown  and  estates  broke  out  simul- 
taneously in  Spain,  France,  and  England.  In  almost  every  Spanish  province  the 
Cortes  rose  against  Olivarez;  Portugal,  and  with  it  India  and  Africa,  fell  away 
for  ever,  and  it  took  years  to  regain  even  Catalonia  and  Naples.  In  England  — 
just  as  in  the  Thirty  Years’  War — the  constitutional  conflict  between  the 
Crown  and  the  gentry  who  dominated  the  Commons  was  carefully  separated 
from  the  religious  side  of  the  Revolution,  deep  as  was  the  interpenetration 
of  the  two.  But  the  growing  resistance  that  Cromwell  encountered  in  the 
lower  class  in  particular  — which  drove  him,  all  unwillingly,  into  military 
dictatorship  — and  the  later  popularity  of  the  restored  monarchy  show  the 
extent  to  which,  over  and  above  all  religious  differences,  aristocratic  interest 
had  been  concerned  in  bringing  about  the  fall  of  the  dynasty. 

At  the  very  time  of  Charles  Is  trial  and  execution  an  insurrection  in  Paris  was 
forcing  the  French  Court  to  flee.  Men  shouted  for  a republic  and  built  barri- 
cades. Had  Cardinal  de  Retz  been  more  of  a Cromwell,  victory  of  the  Estates 
over  Mazarin  would  have  been  at  least  a possibility.  But  the  issue  of  this 
grand  general  crisis  of  the  West  was  determined  by  the  weight  and  the  destinies 
of  a few  personalities,  and  took  shape  in  such  a way  that  it  was  in  England 
alone  that  the  Fronde  (represented  by  Parliament)  subjected  the  State  and  the 
kingship  to  its  control  — confirming  this  control,  in  the  “ glorious  Revolution” 
of  1688,  so  permanently  that  even  to-day  essential  parts  of  the  old  Norman 
State  continue  established.  In  France  and  Spain  the  kingship  won  unqualified 

^ After  artacd  rebellion,  ~ Tr. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  391 

victory.  In  Germany  the  Peace  of  Westphalia  placed  the  Fronde  of  the  greater 
princes  in  an  English  relation  towards  the  Emperor  and  in  the  French  relation 
towards  the  lesser  Fronde  of  the  local  princes.  In  the  Empire  as  such,  the 
Estates  ruled;  in  its  provinces,  the  Dynasty.  Thenceforth  the  Imperial  dignity, 
like  the  English  kingship,  was  a liame,  surrounded  by  relics  of  Spanish  stateii- 
ness  dating  from  the  early  Baroque;  while  the  individual  princes,  like  the  lead- 
ing families  of  the  English  aristocracy,  succumbed  to  the  model  of  Paris  and 
their  duodecimo  absolutism  was,  politically  and  socially,  bound  in  the  Ver- 
sailles style.  So,  in  this  field  and  in  that,  the  decision  fell  in  favour  of  the  Bour- 
bons and  against  the  Habsburgs,  a decision  already  visible  to  all  men  in  the 
Peace  of  the  Pyrenees  of  1659. 

With  this  epochal  turn  the  State,  which  as  a possibility  is  inherent  in  every 
Culture,  was  actualized  and  attained  to  such  a height  of  “condition**  as  could 
neither  be  surpassed  nor  for  long  maintained.  Already  there  is  a quiet  breath 
of  autumn  in  the  air  when  Frederick  the  Great  is  entertaining  at  Sans  Souci. 
These  are  the  years  too,  in  which  the  great  special  arts  attain  to  their  last, 
most  refined,  and  most  intellectual  maturity  — side  by  side  with  the  fine 
orators  of  the  Athenian  Agora  there  are  Zeuxis  and  Praxiteles,  side  by  side 
with  the  filigree  of  Cabinet-diplomacy  the  music  of  Bach  and  Mozart. 

This  cabinet-politics  has  itself  become  a high  art,  an  artistic  satisfaction 
to  all  who  have  a finger  in  it,  marvellous  in  its  subtlety  and  elegance,  courtly, 
refined,  working  mysteriously  at  great  distances  — for  already  Russia,  the 
North  American  colonies,  even  the  Indian  states  are  put  into  play  in  order  by 
the  mere  weight  of  surprising  combinations  to  bring  about  decisions  at  quite 
Other  points  on  the  globe.  It  is  a game  with  strict  rules,  a game  of  intercepted 
letters  and  secret  confidants,  of  alliances  and  congresses  within  a system  of 
governments  which  even  then  was  called  (with  deep  meaning)  the  “concert” 
of  the  powers  — full  of  noblesse  and  esprit,  to  use  the  phrases  of  the  period,  a 
mode  of  keeping  history  “in  form*’  never  and  nowhere  else  imagined,  or  even 
imaginable. 

In  the  Western  world,  whose  sphere  of  influence  is  already  almost  the  sphere 
itself,  the  period  of  the  absolutist.  State  covers  scarcely  a century  and  a half  — 
from  1660,  when  Bourbon  triumphed  over  Habsburg  in  the  Peace  of  the  Pyr- 
enees and  the  Stuarts  returned  to  England,  to  the  Coalition  Wars  directed 
against  the  French  Revolution,  in  which  London  triumphed  over  Paris,  or, 
if  one  prefers  it  so,  over  that  Congress  of  Vienna  in  which  the  old  diplomacy, 
that  of  blood  and  not  money,  gave  the  world  its  grand  farewell  performance. 
Corresponding  periods  are  the  Age  of  Pericles  between  the  First  and  the  Second 
Tyrannis,  and  the  Tshun-tsiu,  “Spring  and  Autumn,”  as  the  Chinese  call  the 
time,  between  the  Protectors  and  the  “Contending  States.” 

In  this  last  phase  of  dignified  politics  with  forms  traditional  but  not  popular, 
familiar  but  not  smiled  at,  the  culminating  points  are  marked  by  the  extinction 


391  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

of  the  two  Habsburg  lines  in  quick  succession  and  the  diplomatic  and  warlike 
events  that  throng  in  lyoo-io  round  the  Spanish,  and  in  1740-60  round  the 
Austrian  succession.^  It  is  the  climax  also  of  the  genealogical  principle.  Bella 
ger ant  alii;  tu,  felix  Austria,  nuhel  was  indeed  **an  extension  of  war  bj  other 
means.’*  The  phrase  indeed  was  coined  long  before  (in  connexion  with 
Maximilian  I),  but  it  was  not  until  now  that  it  reached  its  fullest  effects. 
Fronde  Wars  pass  over  into  Succession  Wars,  decided  upon  in  cabinets  and 
fought  out  chivalrously  by  small  armies  and  according  to  strict  conventions.^ 
What  was  contended  for  was  the  heritage  of  half  the  world  which  the  marriage- 
politics  of  early  Baroque  had  brought  together  in  Habsburg  hands.  The  State 
is  still  **well  up  to  form”;  the  nobility  has  become  a loyal  aristocracy  of 
court  and  service,  carrying  on  the  wars  of  the  Crown  and  organizing  its  ad- 
ministration. Side  by  side  with  the  France  of  Louis  XIV,  there  presently  arose 
in  Prussia  a masterpiece  of  State  organization.  From  the  conflicts  of  the  Great 
Elector  with  his  Estates  (1660)  to  the  death  of  Frederick  the  Great  (who  re- 
ceived Mirabeau  in  audience  three  years  before  the  Fall  of  the  Bastille)  Prussia’s 
road  is  the  same  as  France’s,  and  the  outcome  in  each  case  is  a State  which  was 
in  every  point  the  opposite  of  the  English  order. 

For  the  situation  was  otherwise  in  the  Empire  and  in  England.  There  the 
Frondes  had  won,  and  the  nations  were  governed,  not  absolutely,  but  aristocrat- 
ically. But  between  England  and  the  Empire,  again,  there  was  the  immense 
difference  that  England,  as  an  island,  could  largely  dispense  with  govern- 
mental watchfulness,  and  that  her  peers  in  the  Upper  House  and  her  gentry 
in  the  Lower  founded  their  actions  on  the  self-evidentness  of  England’s  great- 
ness; ^ whereas  in  the  Empire  the  upper  stratum  of  the  land-princes  — with 
the  Diet  at  Regensburg  as  their  Upper  House  — were  chiefly  concerned  with 
educating  into  distinct  peoples”  the  fragments  of  the  nation  that  had  acci- 
dentally fallen  to  their  respective  hands,  and  with  marking  off  their  scattered 
bits  of  fatherland  as  strictly  as  possible  from  other  peoples’”  bits.  In  place 
of  the  world-horizon  that  there  had  been  in  Gothic  days,  provincial  horizon 
was  cultivated  by  thought  and  deed.  The  idea  of  the  Nation  itself  was  aban- 

^ The  fifty-year  interval  of  these  critical  points,  which  is  seen  with  special  distinctness  in  the 
clear  historical  structure  of  the  Baroque,  but  is  recognizable  also  in  the  sequence  of  the  three  Punic 
Wats,  is  yet  another  hint  that  the  Cosmic  flowings  in  the  form  of  human  lives  upon  the  snrfacc  of  a 
minor  star  arc  not  self-contained  and  independent,  but  stand  in  deep  harmony  with  the  unending 
movedness  of  the  universe.  In  a small  but  noteworthy  book,  R.  Mewes,  Kriegs-  md  Gmtespri- 
oden  im  VolhrUhm  mds  Verkundigung  des  nSchsten  Weltkrieges  (1896),  the  relation  of  those  war-periods 
with  weather-periods,  sun-spot  cycles,  and  certain  conjunctures  of  the  planets  is  established,  and  a 
great  war  foretold  accordingly  for  the  period  1910-20.  But  these  and  numerous  similar  connexions 
that  come  within  the  reach  of  our  senses  (c£  pp.  5,  etseq.)  veil  a secret  that  we  have  to  respect  and 
not  to  infringe  with  causal  expositions  or  mystical  brain-spectres. 

® Sec  C.  von  B(indcr)-K(ricglstcin),  im  Kriege  (1896)3  N.  Maude,  War  md  the 

World's  Life  (1907),  and  other  works  by  the  same  author;  also,  in  more  summary  terms,  the  articles 
“Army'*  and  “French  Revolutionary  Wars"  by  the  present  translator  in  En(^.  j^it.,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 

® “Rule,  Britannia"  is  an  eighteenth-century  product.  — Tr. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  393 

doned  to  the  realm  of  dreams  — that  other  world  which  is  not  of  race  but  of 
language,  not  of  Destiny  but  of  Causality.  And  in  it  arose  the  idea,  and  finally 
the  fact,  of  the  people**  as  conceived  by  poets  and  thinkers,  who  founded 
themselves  a republic  in  the  clouds  of  verse  and  logic  and  at  last  came  to  believe 
that  politics  consisted  in  idealistic  writing  and  reading  and  speaking,  and  not 
in  deed  and  resolve  — so  that  even  to-day  real  deeds  and  resolves  are  confused 
with  mere  expressions  of  inclination. 

In  England  the  victory  of  the  gentry  and  the  Declaration  of  Rights  (1689) 
reality  put  an  end  to  the  State.  Parliament  put  William  III  on  his  throne,  just 
as  later  it  prevented  George  I and  George  II  from  vacating  theirs,  in  the  interest 
of  its  class.  The  word  **  State,’*  which  had  been  current  as  early  as  the  Tudors, 
fell  into  disuse  — it  has  become  impossible  to  translate  into  English  either 
Louis  XIV’s  **  Uetat  cest  mot'  or  Frederick  the  Great’s  Ich  Mn  der  erste  Diener 
meiner  Staates''  On  the  other  hand,  the  word  ‘‘society”  established  itself  as 
the  expression  of  the  fact  that  the  nation  was  “in  form”  under  the  class-  and 
not  under  the  state-r6gime;  the  same  word  that  with  a significant  misunder- 
standing Rousseau  and  the  Continental  rationalists  generally  took  over  to 
express  the  hatred  of  the  Third  Estate  for  authority.^  But  in  England  authority 
as  “the  Government”  was  clear-cut  and  well  understood.  From  George  I 
onwards  its  centre  was  the  Cabinet,  a body  which  constitutionally  did  not 
exist  at  all  ^ and  factually  was  an  executive  committee  of  the  faction  of  the 
nobility  in  command  for  the  time  being.  Absolutism  existed,  but  it  was  the 
absolutism  of  a class-delegation.  The  idea  of  '' Pese-majeste'*  was  transferred  to 
Parliament,  as  the  immunity  of  the  Roman  kings  passed  to  the  tribunes.  The 
genealogical  principle  is  there,  too,  but  it  is  expressed  in  the  family  relations 
within  the  higher  nobility  and  the  influence  of  the  same  upon  the  parliamentary 
situation.  Even  in  i90i  Lord  Salisbury  acted  as  a Cecil  in  proposing  his  nephew 
Balfour  as  his  successor  as  against  Joseph  Chamberlain.  The  noble  factions 
of  Tory  and  Whig  separated  themselves  more  and  more  distinctly,  very  often, 
indeed,  within  the  same  family,  according  to  whether  the  “ power-”  outweighed 
the  “booty-”  outlook  — that  is,  according  as  land  was  valued  above  money  ® 
— or  vice  versa,  a contrast  that  even  in  the  eighteenth  century  was  expressed 
within  the  higher  bourgeoisie  by  the  words  “respectable”  and  “fashionable,” 
standing  for  two  opposed  conceptions  of  the  gentleman.  The  State’s  care  for 
all  is  frankly  replaced  by  class-interest.  It  is  for  this  that  the  individual  claims 
his  freedom — that  is  what  “freedom”  means  in  English  — but  the  insular 
existence  and  the  build  of  “society**  have  created  such  relations  that  in  the 

^ For  this,  and  what  follows,  see  my  Freussmtum  und  So^ialismus,  pp.  31,  et  seq, 

® Mr.  Asquith  (Lord  Oxford)  was  the  first  British  Prime  Minister  to  be  officially  so  styled.  — Tr. 

® “Landed”  and  “funded”  interests  (J.  Hatschek,  Engl.  Verfassungsgescklchu,  1913,  pp.  589,  et 
seq.  Walpole,  the  organizer  of  the  Whig  party  after  1714,  used  to  describe  himself  and  Townshend 
as  “the  Firm;”  and  this  “firm”  with  various  changes  of  proprietorship  governed  without  limitation 
till  1760. 


394  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  W/EST 

last  resort  everyone  who  belongs  to  it  (which  is  a matter  of  moment  in  a status- 
dictatorship)  finds  his  interests  represented  by  those  of  one  or  the  other  noble 
party. 

This  steadiness  of  last,  deepest,  and  ripest  form,  which  springs  from  the 
historical  feeling  of  Western  mankind,  was  denied  to  the  Classical.  Tyrannis 
vanished.  Strict  qligarchy  vanished.  The  Demos  which  the  politics  of  the 
sixth  century  had  created  as  the  sum  of  all  men  belonging  to  the  Polis  burst 
into  factions  and  spasmodic  shocks  of  noble  versus  non-noble,  and  conflicts 
began  within  states,  and  between  states^  in  which  each  party  tried  to  exterminate 
the  other  lest  it  should  itself  be  exterminated.  When  in  511  — that  is,  still  in 
the  age  of  the  Tyrants  — Sybaris  was  annihilated  by  the  Pythagoreans,  the 
event,  the  first  of  its  kind,  shocked  the  entire  Classical  world;  even  in  distant 
Miletus  mourning  was  worn.  But  now  the  elimination  of  a Polis  or  a party 
was  so  usual  that  a regular  form  and  choice  of  methods  — corresponding  to  the 
typical  peace-treaties  of  Western  Baroque  — arose  for  the  disposal  of  the 
vanquished  •— for  example,  the  inhabitants  might  be  massacred  or  sold  into 
slavery,  the  houses  razed  or  divided  as  spoil.  The  will  to  absolutism  is  there 
— after  the  Persian  Wars  it  is  universal,  in  Rome  and  Sparta  no  less  than  in 
Athens  — but  the  w/W  narrowness  of  the  Polis,  the  point-politic,  and  the 
willed  brevity  of  office-holding  and  immediacy  of  schemes  made  it  impossible 
ever  to  reach  a firm  decision  as  to  who  should  be  “ the  State.’’  ^ The  high  craft 
of  diplomacy,  which  in  the  West  was  practised  by  cabinets  inspired  by  a tra- 
dition, was  here  handicapped  by  an  amateurism  founded  not  on  any  accidental 
inadequacy  of  persons  — the  men  were  available  — but  solely  in  the  political 
form  itself.  The  course  of  this  form  from  the  First  to  the  Second  Tyrannis  is 
unmistakable  and  corresponds  to  the  same  evolution  in  all  other  Late  periods; 
but  the  specifically  Classical  style  of  it  appears  in  the  disorder  and  subjection 
to  incidentals  which  naturally  and  inevitably  followed  from  a life  that  could 
not  and  would  not  dissociate  itself  from  the  moment. 

The  most  important  example  of  this  is  the  evolution  of  Rome  during  the 
fifth  century  — a period  over  which  hitherto  historians  have  wrangled, 
precisely  because  they  have  tried  to  find  in  it  a consistency  that  can  no  more 
have  existed  there  than  anywhere  else  in  the  Classical  State.  A further  source 
of  misunderstanding  is  that  the  conditions  of  that  development  have  been  re- 
garded as  something  quite  primitive,  whereas  in  fact  even  the  city  of  the 
Tarquins  must  have  already  been  in  a very  advanced  state,  and  primitive  Rome 
lay  much  further  back.  The  relations  of  the  fifth  century  are  on  a small  scale 
in  comparison  with  those  of  Caesar’s  age,  but  they  were  not  antiquated.  Be- 
cause written  tradition  is  defective  (as  it  was  everywhere  save  in  Athens),  the 
literary  movement  which  followed  the  Punic  Wars  set  itself  to  fill  the  blanks 
with  poetry  and  in  particular  (as  was  to  be  expected  in  the  Hellenistic  age) 
^ R.  von  Pohlmann,  pp.  2.2.3-45 


I with,  the  evocation  of  an  idyllic  past,  as,  for  example,  in  the  story  of  Cincin- 

j natns.  And  modern  scholarship,  though  it  has  ceased  to  believe  these  legends, 

! has  nevertheless  remained  under  the  influence  of  the  taste  that  inspired  their 

invention,  and  continues  to  look  at  the  conditions  of  the  time  through  its 
j eyes  — the  more  readily  as  Greek  and  Roman  history  are  treated  as  two  separate 

worlds,  and  the  evil  practice  of  identifying  the  beginning  of  history  with  the 
j beginning  of  sure  documentation  is  followed  as  usual.  In  truth,  the  conditions 

* of  500  B.c.  are  anything  but  Homeric.  The  trace  of  its  walls  shows  that  Rome 

under  the  Tarquins  was,  with  Capua,  the  greatest  city  in  Italy  and  bigger  than 
the  Athens  of  Themistocles.^  A city  that  concludes  commercial  treaties  with 
Carthage  is  no  peasant  commune.  And  it  follows  that  the  population  in  the 
four  city  tribes  of  471  must  have  been  very  numerous,  probably  greater  than 
the  whole  total  of  the  sixteen  country  tribes  scattered  insignificantly  in  space. 

The  great  success  of  the  landowning  nobility  in  overthrowing  a Tyrannis 
that  was  almost  certainly  very  popular,  and  establishing  unrestricted  senatorial 
rule,  was  nullified  again  by  a series  of  violent  events  about  471  — the  replace- 
! ment  of  the  family  tribes  by  four  great  city-wards,  the  representation  of  these 

by  tribunes  (who  were  sacrosanct  — i.e.,  who  enjoyed  a privilege  that 
no  single  official  of  the  aristocratic  administration  possessed)  and  lastly  the 
liberation  of  the  small  peasantry  from  the  cluntda  of  the  nobility. 

The  Tribunate  was  the  happiest  inspiration,  not  only  of  this  period,  but 
1 of  the  Classical  Polls  generally.  It  was  the  Tyrannis  raised  to  the  position  of  an 

I integral  part  of  the  Constitution^  and  set  in  parallel,  moreover,  with  the  old  oli- 

I garchical  offices,  all  of  which  continued  in  being.  This  meant  that  the  social 

f revolution  also  was  carried  out  in  legal  forms ^ so  that  what  was  elsewhere  a 

I wild  discharge  in  shock  and  countershock  became  here  a forum-contest,  limited 

I as  a rule  to  debate  and  vote.  There  was  no  need  to  evoke  the  tyrant,  for  he  was 

I there  already.  The  Tribune  possessed  rights  inherent  in  position,  not  rights 

I arising  out  of  an  office,  and  with  his  immunity  he  could  carry  out  revolutionary 

I acts  that  would  have  been  inconceivable  without  street-fighting  in  any  other 

I Polls.  This  creation  was  an  incident,  but  no  other  of  its  creations  helped  Rome 

I to  rise  as  this  did.  In  Rome  alone  the  transition  from  the  First  to  the  Second 

j Tyrannis,  and  the  further  development  therefrom  till  beyond  the  days  of  Zama, 

j ^ Ed.  Meyer,  Gssch.  d.  Alt.  V § 809.  If  Latin  became  a literary  language,  only  very  late  — after 

Alexander  — the  only  deduction  to  be  made  from  the  fact  is  that  under  the  Tarquins  Greek  and 
Etruscan  must  have  been  in  general  use  — which,  after  all,  goes  without  saying  for  a city  that  was 
j of  a size  and  position  to  have  relations  with  Carthage;  that  waged  war  in  alliance  with  Cyme  and 

I made  use«of  the  Treasury  of  Massalia  at  Delphi;  whose  standard  weights  and  measures  were  Dorian; 

5 whose  mode  of  warfare  was  Sicilian;  and  whose  walls  contained  a large  foreign  colony.  Livy 

(IX,  36),  following  older  statements,  observes  that  about  300  the  Roman  boy  was  still  brought  up 
on  Etruscan  culture,  as  he  was  later  on  Greek.  The  anoient  form  “ UHxes  ” for  Odysseus  shows  that 
the  Homeric  sagas  were  not  only  known,  but  popularly  known  here  (cf.  p.  184).  The  provisions  of 
the  Twelve  Tables  (r.  450)  agree  with  the  more  or  less  contemporary  law  of  Gortyn  in  Crete  (cf. 
p.  63),  not  merely  as  to  substance,  but  even  stylistically  — so  exactly  that  the  Roman  patricians  who 
^ drew  them  up  must  have  been  entirely  at  home  with  juristic  Greek. 


;3,96,  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ; 

was  accoinplislied,  not  indeed  without  shocks,  but  at  any  rate  without  catas- 
trophe. The  Tribune  was  the  link  between  the  Tarquins  and  Caesar.  With 
the  Lex  Hortensia  of  187  he  became  all-powerful,  h is  the  Second  Tyrannis  in 
constituttonal  ''form,  * * In  the  second  century,  tribunes  caused  consuls  and  censors 
to  be  arrested.  The  Gracchi  were  tribunes,  Csesar  assumed  the  perpetual  trib- 
unate, and  in  the  principate  of  Augustus  the  tribunician  dignity  was  the 
essential  element  of  his  position,  the  only  one  in  virtue  of  which  he  possessed 
sovereign  rights. 

The  crisis  of  471  was  not  unique  but  genetically  Classical.  Its  target  was  the 
oligarchy,  which  even  now,  within  the  Demos  created  by  the  Tyrannis,  strove 
to  be  the  impulsive  force  in  affairs.  It  was  no  longer,  as  in  Hesiod’s  day,  the 
oligarchy  as  estate  versus  non-estate,  but  the  oligarchic  party  against  a second  party 
— both  in  the  cadre  of  the  absolute  state,  which  as  such  was  not  brought  into 
the  controversy.  In  Athens,  487  b.c.,  the  archons  were  overthrown  and  their 
rights  transferred  to  the  college  of  strategi.^  In  461  the  Areopagus,  the  Athenian 
equivalent  of  the  Senate,  was  overthrown.  In  Sicily  (where  relations  with 
Rome  were  close)  the  democracy  triumphed  at  Acragas  (Agrigentum)  in  471,  at 
Syracuse  in  465,  at  Rhegium  and  Messana  in  461.  In  Sparta  the  kings  Cleomenes 
(488)  and  Pausanias  (470)  tried  in  turn,  without  success,  to  free  the  Helots  — 
in  Roman  terms,  the  Clientela  — and  thereby  to  acquire  for  the  kingship, 
vis-h-vis  the  oligarchic  Ephors,  the  importance  of  the  tribunate  in  Rome.  The 
missing  element  in  this  case,  which  was  present  (though  overlooked  by  our 
scholars)  in  that  of  Rome,  was  the  population-strength  of  the  mercantile  city 
that  gives  such  movements  both  weight  and  leadership;  it  was  on  this  that 
even  the  great  Helot  rising  of  464  broke  down  (an  event  which  probably  in- 
spired the  Roman  legends  of  a secession  of  the  Plebs  to  the  Mons  Sacer). 

In  a Polis,  the  country  nobility  and  the  patriciate  fuse  (that  is  the  object  of 
synoecism,  as  we  have  seen),  but  not  so  the  burgher  and  the  peasant.  So  far  as 
concerns  their  struggle  with  the  oligarchy  these  are  a single  party  — namely, 
the  democratic  — but  otherwise  they  are  two.  This  is  what  comes  to  expression 
in  the  next  crisis.  In  this  (r.  450)  the  Roman  patriciate  sought  to  re-establish 
its  power  as  a party  — for  so  we  must  interpret  the  introduction  of  the  Decemvirs 
and  the  abolition  of  the  Tribunate;  the  legislation  of  the  Twelve  Tables  by 
which  the  plebs,  which  had  recently  attained  political  existence,  was  denied 
'Xonnubium”  and  ‘‘  Commercium”;  and  above  all  the  creation  of  the  small 
country  tribes  in  which  the  influence  of  the  old  families  (not  legally  but  in 
fact)  predominated  and  which  (in  the  Comitia  Tributa  now  set  up  alongside  the 
old  Centuriata)  enjoyed  the  unchallengeable  majority  of  16  to  4.  This,  of 
course,  meant  the  disfranchisement  of  the  townspeople  by  the  peasantry,  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was  a move  of  the  Patrician  party  to  make  effective 

^ This  measure  — a usurpation  of  the  administration  by  the  ** nation  in  arms”  — corresponds  to 
the  setting-up  of  Consular  Tribunes  in  Rome  in  the  military  disturbances  of  438. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  397 

in  one  eommon  blow  the  common  antipathy  of  the  countryside  and  themselves 
towards  the  money  economics  of  the  city. 

The  counterstroke  came  quickly;  it  is  recognizable  in  the  number  tm  of  the 
tribunes  who  appear  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  Decemvirs/  but  there  were 
other  events  too  that  cannot  but  have  belonged  with  it  — the  attempt  of  Sp. 
Manlius  to  set  up  a Tyrannis  (439),  the  setting-up  of  Consular  Tribunes  by  the 
army  in  place  of  the  civil  officials  (438),  and  the  Lex  Canuleia  (445/  which 
made  an  end  of  the  prohibition  of  connubium  between  patricians  and  plebe- 
ians. 

There  can  be  no  doubt,  of  course,  that  there  were  factions  within  both  the 
patrician  and  the  plebeian  parties  which  would  have  liked  to  upset  this  funda- 
mental trait  of  the  Roman  Polls,  the  opposition  of  Senate  and  Tribunate,  by 
abolishing  the  one  or  the  other;  but  the  form  turned  out  to  be  so  right  that  it 
was  never  seriously  challenged.  With  the  enforcement  by  the  Army  of  plebeian 
eligibility  to  the  highest  offices  C399)  the  contest  took  a quite  different  turn. 
The  fifth  century  may  be  summed  up,  under  the  aspect  of  internal  politics,  as 
that  of  the  struggle  for  lawful  Tyrannis;  thenceforward  the  polarity  of  the 
constitution  was  admitted,  and  the  parties  contended  no  longer  for  the  abolition, 
but  for  the  capture,  of  the  great  offices.  This  was  the  substance  of  the  revolution 
that  took  place  in  the  period  of  the  Samnite  Wars.  From  187  the  Plebes  had  the 
entree  to  all  offices,  and  the  proposals  of  the  tribunes,  when  approved  by  them, 
automatically  became  law;  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  thenceforward  always 
practicable  for  the  Senate  by  corruption  or  otherwise  to  induce  some  one  tribune 
to  exercise  his  veto  and  thus  to  deprive  the  institution  of  its  power.  It  was 
in  the  of  two  competent  authofities  that  the  juristic  subtlety  of  the  Romans 

was  developed.  Elsewhere  decisions  were  usually  by  way  of  fist  and  bludgeon 
— the  technical  word  is  '‘Cheirocracy”  — but  in  this  “best**  period  of  Roman 
constitutional  law,  the  fourth  century,  the  habit  was  formed  of  using  the 
weapons  of  thesis  and  interpretation,  a mode  of  contest  in  which  the  slightest 
points  of  legal  wording  could  be  decisive. 

But  Rome  was  unique  in  all  Classical  history  in  this  equilibrium  of  Senate 
and  Tribunate.  Everywhere  else  it  was  a matter  not  of  swaying  balance,  but  of 
sheer  alternatives,  namely  Oligarchy  or  Ochlocracy.  The  absolute  Polis  and 
the  Nation  which  was  identical  with  it  were  accepted  as  given  premisses,  but 
of  the  inward  forms  none  possessed  stability.  The  victory  of  one  party  meant 
the  abolition  of  ail  the  institutions  of  the  other,  and  people  became  accustomed 
to  regard  nothing  as  either  venerable  enough  or  useful  enough  to  be  exempt 
from  the  chances  of  the  day’s  battle.  Sparta’s  “form,”  so  to  say,  was  sen- 
atorial, Athens’s  tribunician,  and  by  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian  War, 

1 According  to  B,  Niese.  Modern’  investigators  arc  right  in  the  view  that  the  Deccmvirate  was 
at  first  intended  to  be  temporary;  but  the  question  is  — what  were  the  views  of  the  party  that 
backed  them  concerning  the  ntw  constitutional  order  that  was  to  follow.  It  was  on  that  that  a 
crisis  had  inevitably  to  come. 


3^  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

in  43 1 5 the  idea  that  forms  must  be  alternative  was  so  firmly  fixed  that  only 
radical  solutions  were  henceforth  possible. 

With  this,  the  future  was  set  for  Rome.  It  was  the  one  state  in  which 
political  passions  had  persons  only,  and  no  longer  institutions,  as  their  target; 
the  only  one  which  was  firmly  in  ‘‘form.’*  Senatus  Pofulus^ue  Romams — that 
is,  Senate  and  Tribunate  — was  the  form  of  forged  bronze  that  no  party  would 
henceforward  batter,  whereas  all  the  rest,  with  the  narrowness  of  their  individ- 
ual power-horizons  in  the  world  of  Classical  states,  were  only  able  to  prove  once 
more  the  fact  that  domestic  politics  exist  simply  in  order  that  foreign  politics 
may  be  possible. 

VI 

At  this  point,  when  the  Culture  is  beginning  to  turn  itself  into  the  Civiliza- 
tion, the  non-Estate  intervenes  in  affairs  decisively  — and  for  the  first  time  — 
as  an  independent  force.  Under  the  Tyrannis  and  the  Fronde,  the  State  has 
invoked  its  aid  against  the  Estates  proper,  and  it  has  for  the  first  time  learned 
to  feci  itself  a power.  Now  it  employs  its  strength  for  itself,  and  does  so  as  a 
class  standing  for  its  freedom  against  the  rest.  It  sees  in  the  absolute  State,  in 
the  Crown,  in  rooted  institutions,  the  natural  allies  of  the  old  Estates  and  the 
true  and  last  representatives  of  symbolic  tradition.  This  is  the  difference 
between  the  First  and  the  Second  Tyrannis,  between  Fronde  and  Bourgeois 
Revolution,  between  Cromwell  and  Robespierre. 

The  State,  with  its  heavy  demands  on  each  individual  in  it,  is  felt  by  urban 
reason  as  a burden.  So,  in  the  same  phase,  the  great  forms  of  the  Baroque  arts 
begin  to  be  felt  as  restrictive  and  become  Classicist  or  Romanticist  — that  is, 
sickly  or  unformed;  German  literature  from  1770  is  one  long  revolt  of  strong 
individual  personalities  against  strict  poetry.  The  idea  of  the  whole  nation 
being  “in  training”  or  “in  form”  for  anything  becomes  intolerable,  for  the 
individual  himself  inwardly  is  no  longer  in  condition.  This  holds  good  in 
morals,  in  arts,  and  in  modes  of  thought,  but  most  of  all  in  politics.  Every 
bourgeois  revolution  has  as  its  scene  the  great  city,  and  as  its  hall-mark  the 
incomprehension  of  old  symbols,  which  it  replaces  by  tangible  interests  and  the 
craving  (or  even  the  mere  wish)  of  enthusiastic  thinkers  and  world-improvers 
to  see  their  conceptions  actualized.  Nothing  now  has  value  but  that  which 
can  be  justified  by  reason.  But,  deprived  thus  of  the  exaltation  of  a form  that 
is  essentially  symbolical  and  works  metaphysically,  the  national  life  loses  the 
power  of  keeping  its  head  up  in  the  being-streams  of  history.  Follow  the  des- 
perate attempts  of  the  French  Government  — the  handful  of  capable  and 
farsighted  men  under  the  mediocre  Louis  XVI — to;  keep  their  country  in 
“ condition”  when,  after  the  death  of  Vergennes  in  1787,  the  whole  gravity  of 
the  external  situation  had  become  manifest.  With  the  death  of  this  diplo- 
matist France  disappeared  for  years  from  the  political  combinations  of  Europe; 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  399 

at  the  same  time  the  great  reform  that  the  Crown  had  carried  through  against 
all  resistances  — above  all,  the  general  administrative  reform  of  that  year, 
based  on  the  freest  self-management  — remained  completely  ineffective,  because 
in  view  of  the  pliancy  of  the  State,  the  question  of  the  moment  for  the  Estates 
became,  suddenly,  the  question  of  power. ^ As  a century  before  and  a century 
afterwards,  European  war  was  drawing  visibly  nearer  with  an  inexorable 
necessity,  but  no  one  now  took  any  notice  of  the  external  situation.  The 
nobility  as  an  Estate  had  rarely,  but  the  bourgeoisie  as  an  Estate  had  never, 
thought  in  terms  of  foreign  policy  and  world-history.  Whether  the  State  in 
its  new  form  would  be  able  to  hold  its  own  at  all  amongst  the  other  States,  no 
one  asked.  All  that  mattered  was  whether  it  secured  men’s  “rights.” 

But  the  bourgeoisie,  the  class  of  urban  “freedom,”  strong  as  its  class-feeling 
remained  for  generations  (in  West  Europe  even  beyond  1848),  was  at  no  time 
wholly  master  of  its  actions.  For,  jSrst  of  all,  it  became  manifest  in  every 
critical  situation  that  its  unity  was  a negative  unity,  only  really  existent  in 
moments  of  opposition  to  something,  anything,  else — “Tiers  6tat”  and  “Op- 
position” are  almost  synonymous  — and  that  when  something  constructive  of 
its  own  had  to  be  done,  the  interests  of  the  various  groups  pulled  all  ways. 
To  be  free  from  something  — that,  all  wanted.  But  the  intellectual  desired 
the  State  as  an  actualization  of  “justice”  against  the  force  of  historical  facts; 
or  the  “rights  of  man”;  or  freedom  of  criticism  as  against  the  dominant  re- 
ligion. And  Money  wanted  a free  path  to  business  success.  There  were  a good 
many  who  desired  rest  and  renunciation  of  historical  greatness,  or  wished  this 
and  that  tradition  and  its  embodiments,  on  which  physically  or  spiritually 
they  lived,  to  be  spared.  But  there  was  another  element,  now  and  henceforth, 
that  had  not  existed  in  the  conflicts  of  the  Fronde  (the  English  Civil  War  in- 
cluded) or  the  first  Tyrannis,  but  this  time  stood  for  a power  — - namely,  that 
which  is  found  in  all  Civilizations  under  different  contemptuous  labels  — 
dregs,  canaille^  mob,  Pdbel  — but  with  the  same  tremendous  connotation. 
In  the  great  cities,  which  alone  now  spoke  the  decisive  words  — the  open  land 
can  at  most  accept  or  reject  faits  accomplis,  as  our  eighteenth  century  proves  ^ — 
a mass  of  rootless  fragments  of  population  stands  outside  all  social  linkages. 
These  do  not  feel  themselves  as  attached  either  to  an  Estate  or  to  a vocational 
class,  nor  even  to  the  real  working-class,  although  they  arc  obliged  to  work. 

^ A.  Wahl,  Vorgeschichte  d.  fran^.  Revolution^  11(1507);  this  work  is  the  only  presentation  of  the 
subject  from  the  world-historical  point  of  view.  All  Frenchmen,  even  the  most  modern,  such  as 
Aulard  and  Sorcl,  sec  things  from  one  or  another  partisan  angle.  It  is  materialistic  nonsense  to  talk 
of  economic  causes  for  a Revolution  like  this.  Even  the  peasantry  was  better  off  than  in  most  other 
countries,  and  in  any  case  it  was  not  among  them  that  it  began.  It  was  amongst  the  educated  that 
the  catastrophe  started,  the  educated  of  all  the  classes  — in  the  high  nobility  and  the  clergy  even 
sooner  than  in  the  higher  bourgeoisie,  because  the  course  of  the  first  assembly  of  Notables  (1787)  had 
disclosed  the  possibility  of  radically  reshaping  the  form  of  government  according  to  class-desires. 

^ Even  the  highly  provincial  March  Revolution  of  1848  in  Germany  was  a purely  urban  matter; 
hence  the  vanishingly  small  proportion  of  the  population  involved  as  participants. 


400  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  ^ 

Elements  drawn  from  all  classes  and  conditions  belong  to  it  instinctively  — 
uprooted  peasantry,  literates,  ruined  business  men,  and  above  all  (as  the  age  of 
Catiline  shows  with  terrifying  clarity)  derailed  nobles.  Their  power  is  far  in 
excess  of  their  numbers,  for  they  are  always  on  the  spot,  always  on  hand  at  the 
big  decisions,  ready  for  anything,  devoid  of  all  respect  for  orderliness,  even 
the  orderliness  of  a revolutionary  party.  It  is  from  them  that  events  acquire  the 
destructive  force  which  distinguishes  the  French  Revolution  from  the  English, 
and  the  Second  Tyrannis  from  the  First.  The  bourgeoisie  looks  at  these  masses 
with  real  uneasiness,  defensively,  and  seeks  to  separate  itself  from  them  — it 
was  to  a defensive  act  of  this  category,  the  13th  Vendemiaire,  that  Napoleon 
owed  his  rise.  ^ But  in  the  pressure  of  facts  the  separating  frontier  cannot  be 
drawn;  wherever  the  bourgeoisie  throws  into  the  scale  against  the  older  orders 
its  feeble  weight  of  aggressiveness  — feeble  in  relative  numbers  and  feeble 
because  its  inner  cohesion  is  risked  at  every  moment  — this  mass  has  forced 
itself  into  their  ranks,  pushed  to  the  front,  imparted  most  of  the  drive  that  wins 
the  victory,  and  very  often  managed  to  secure  the  conquered  position  for  itself 
— not  seldom  with  the  continued  idealistic  support  of  the  educated  who  are 
intellectually  captivated,  or  the  material  backing  of  the  money  powers,  which 
seek  to  divert  the  danger  from  themselves  on  to  the  nobility  and  the  clergy. 

There  is  another  aspect,  too,  under  which  this  epoch  has  its  importance  — 
in  it  for  the  first  time  abstract  truths  seek  to  intervene  in  the  world  of  facts. 
The  capital  cities  have  become  so  great,  and  urban  man  so  superior  and  influential 
over  the  waking-consciousness  of  the  whole  Culture  (this  influmce  is  what  we  call 
Public  Opinion)  that  the  powers  of  the  blood  and  the  tradition  inherent  in  the 
blood  are  shaken  in  their  hitherto  unassailable  position.  For  it  must  be  re- 
membered that  the  Baroque  State  and  the  absolute  Polls  in  their  final  develop- 
ment of  form  are  thoroughly  living  expressions  of  a breed,  and  that  history,  so 
far  as  it  accomplishes  itself  in  these  forms,  possesses  the  full  pulse  of  that  breed. 
Any  theory  of  the  State  that  may  be  fashioned  here  is  one  that  is  deduced  from 
the  facts,  that  bows  to  the  greatness  of  the  facts.  The  idea  of  the  State  had 
finally  mastered  the  blood  of  the  first  Estate,  and  put  it  wholly  and  without 
reserve  at  the  State’s  service.  “Absolute**  means  that  the  great  being-stream  is 
as  a unit  in  form,  possesses  one  kind  of  pulse  and  instinct,  whether  the  manifesta- 
tions of  that  pulse  be  diplomatic  or  strategic  flair,  dignity  of  moral  and  manners, 
or  fastidious  taste  in  arts  and  thoughts. 

As  the  contradictory  to  this  grand  fact,  now,  Rationalism  appears  and 
spreads,  that  which  has  been  described  above  ^ as  the  community  of  wakings 
consciousness  in  the  educated,  whose  religion  is  criticism  and  whose  numina  are 

^ Hence  also  the  exclusive  bourgeois  character  of  the  National  Guard  in  France  from  1815  to 
1851,  the  period  between  two  phases  of  popular  Tyrannis.  In  the  cou^  d'etat  by  which  Napoleon  III 
seized  the  throne,  Paris  was  filled  with  regular  troops,  and  the  National  Guard  was  forbidden  to 
assemble  on  pain  of  death-  — Tr, 

2 Pp.  97,  and  305. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  401 

not  deities  but  concepts.  Now  begins  the  influence  of  books  and  general 
theories  upon  politics  — in  the  China  of  Lao-tse  as  in  the  Athens  of  the  Sophists 
and  the  Europe  of  Montesquieu  — and  the  public  opinion  formed  by  them 
plants  itself  in  the  path  of  diplomacy  as  a political  magnitude  of  quite  a new 
sort.  It  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  Pisistratus  or  Richelieu  or  even 
Cromwell  determined  their  actions  under  the  influence  of  abstract  systems,  but 
after  the  victory  of  “Enlightenment’*  that  is  what  actually  happens. 

Nevertheless  the  historical  r61e  of  the  great  concepts  of  the  Civilization  is 
very  different  from  the  complexion  that  they  presented  in  the  minds  of  the 
ideologues  who  conceived  them.  The  effect  of  a truth  is  always  quite  different 
from  its  tendency.  In  the  world  of  facts,  truths  are  simply  means,  cScctirc  in 
so  far  as  they  dominate  spirits  and  therefore  determine  actions.  Their  historical 
position  is  determined  not  by  whether  they  are  deep,  correct,  or  even  merely 
logical,  but  by  whether  they  ulL  We  see  this  in  the  phrase  “catchword,” 
** ScMagwort,**  What  certain  symbols,  livingly  experienced,  are  for  the  Spring- 
time religions  — the  Holy  Sepulchre  for  the  Crusader,  the  Substance  of  Christ 
for  the  times  of  the  Council  of  Nicasa  — that  two  or  three  inspiriting  word- 
sounds  are  for  every  Civilized  revolution.  It  is  only  the  catchwords  that 
are  facts  — the  residue  of  the  philosophical  or  sociological  system  whence  they 
come  does  not  matter  to  history.  But,  as  catchwords,  they  are  for  about  two 
centuries  powers  of  the  first  rank,  stronger  even  than  the  pulse  of  the  blood, 
which  in  the  petrifying  world  of  the  outspread  cities  is  beginning  to  be  dulled. 

But  — the  critical  spirit  is  only  one  of  the  two  tendencies  which  emerge 
out  of  the  chaotic  mass  of  the  Non-Estate.  Along  with  abstract  concepts 
abstract  Money,  — money  divorced  from  the  prime  values  of  the  land  — along 
with  the  Study  the  counting-house,  appear  as  political  forces.  The  two  are  in- 
wardly cognate  and  inseparable  — the  old  opposition  between  priest  and  noble 
continued,  acute  as  ever,  in  the  bourgeois  atmosphere  and  the  city  framework.^ 
Of  the  two,  moreover,  it  is  the  Money  that,  as  pure  fact,  shows  itself  un- 
conditionally superior  to  the  ideal  truths,  which  so  far  as  the  fact-world  is 
concerned  exist  (as  I have  just  said)  only  as  catchwords,  as  means.  If  by 
“democracy”  we  mean  the  form  which  the  Third  Estate  as  such  wishes  to 
impart  to  public  life  as  a whole,  it  must  be  concluded  that  democracy  and 
plutocracy  are  the  same  thing  under  the  two  aspects  of  wish  and  actuality, 
theory  and  practice,  knowing  and  doing.  It  is  the  tragic  comedy  of  the  world- 
improvers’  and  fireedom-teachers’  desperate  fight  against  money  that  they  are 
ipso  facto  assisting  money  to  be  effective.  Respect  for  the  big  number  — ex- 
pressed in  the  principles  of  equality  for  all,  natural  rights,  and  universal  suf- 
frage— is  just  as  much  a class-ideal  of- the  unclassed  as  freedom  of  public 
opinion  (and  more  particularly  freedom  of  the  press)  is  so.  These  are  ideals, 
but  in  actuality  the  feedom  of  public  opinion  involves  the  preparation  of  public 

^ See  pp.  348. 


401  ' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

opinion,  which,  costs  money;  and  the  freedom  of  the  press  brings  with  it  the 
question  of  possession  of  the  press,  which  again  is  a matter  of  money;  and  with 
the  franchise  comes  electioneering,  in  which  he  who  pays  the  piper  calls  the 
tune.  The  representatives  of  the  ideas  look  at  one  side  only,  while  the  repre- 
sentatives of  money  operate  with  the  other.  The  concepts  of  Liberalism  and 
Socialism  are  set  in  effective  motion  only  by  money.  It  was  the  Equites,  the 
big-money  party,  which  made  Tiberius  Gracchus's  popular  movement  possible 
at  all;  and  as  soon  as  that  part  of  the  reforms  that  was  advantageous  to  them- 
selves had  been  successfully  legalized,  they  withdrew  and  the  movement 
collapsed.  Cassar  and  Crassus  financed  the  Catilinarian  movement,  and  so 
directed  it  against  the  Senatorial  party  instead  of  against  property.  In  England 
politicians  of  eminence  laid  it  down  as  early  as  1700  that  “ on  'Change  one  deals 
in  votes  as  well  as  in  stocks,  and  the  price  of  a vote  is  as  well  known  as  the  price 
of  an  acre  of  land.”  ^ When  the  news  of  Waterloo  reached  Paris,  the  price  of 
French  government  stock  rose  ^ — the  Jacobins  had  destroyed  the  old  obliga- 
tions of  the  blood  and  so  had  emancipated  money;  now  it  stepped  forward  as 
lord  of  the  land.^  There  is  no  proletarian,  not  even  a Communist,  movement 
that  has  not  operated  in  the  interest  of  money,  in  the  directions  indicated  by 
money,  and  for  the  time  permitted  by  money  — and  that,  without  the  idealist 
amongst  its  leaders  having  the  slightest  suspicion  of  the  fact.*^  Intellect  rejects, 
money  directs  — so  it  runs  in  every  last  act  of  a Culture-drama,  when  the 
megalopolis  has  become  master  over  the  rest.  And,  in  the  limit,  intellect  has 
no  cause  of  complaint.  For,  after  all,  it  has  won  its  victory  — namely,  in  its 
own  realm  of  truths,  the  realm  of  books  and  ideals  that  is  not  of  this  world. 
Its  conceptions  have  become  venerabilia  of  the  beginning  Civilization.  But 
Money  wins,  through  these  very  concepts,  in  its  realm,  which  is  only  of  this 
world. 

In  the  Western  world  of  States,  it  was  in  England  that  both  sides  of  Third- 
Estate  politics,  the  ideal  and  the  real,  graduated.  Here  alone  it  was  possible  for 
the  Third  Estate  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  marching  against  an  absolute  State 
in  order  to  destroy  it  and  set  up  its  own  dominion  on  the  ruins.  For  here  it 
could  grow  up  into  the  strong  form  of  the  First  Estate,  where  it  found  a fully 
developed  form  of  interest-politics,  and  from  whose  methods  it  could  borrow 
for  its  own  purposes  a traditional  tactic  such  as  it  could  hardly  wish  to  improve 

^ J.  Hatschck,  EngL  Verfassmgsgesch,^  p,  588. 

2 On  the  other  side  of  the  Channel,  it  is  well  known  that  the  Rothschild  fortune  was  founded 
in  a dramatic  play  upon  the  varying  news  from  the  front  in  Belgium. 

In  the  second  phase  of  the  Franco-German  War  of  1870-1  the  bankers  of  Frankfurt  took  up  hold- 
ings in  the  loans  floated  by  the  French  Government  of  National  Defence.  — Tr. 

® But  even  during  the  Reign  of  Terror  in  the  middle  of  Paris,  there  flourished  the  establishment 
of  Dr.  Belhommc,  in  which  members  of  the  highest  aristocracy  ate  and  drank  and  danced  out  of  all 
danger  for  so  long  as  they  could  pay  (G.  Lcndtrc,  Das  rmlutimdre  p.  409). 

^ The  great  movement  which  makes  use  of  the  catchwords  of  Marx  has  not  delivered  the  en- 
trepreneur into  the  power  of  the  worker,  but  both  into  that  of  the  Bourse. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  403 

upon.  Here  was  the  home  of  Parliamentarism,  genuine  and  quite  inimitable, 
which  had  insular  position  instead  of  the  state  as  its  starting-point,  and  the 
habits  of  the  First  and  not  the  Third  Estate  as  its  background.  Further,  there 
was  the  circumstance  that  this  form  had  grown  up  in  the  full  bloom  of  Baroque 
and,  therefore,  had  Music  in  it.  The  Parliamentary  style  was  completely 
identical  with  that  of  cabinet-diplomacy;^  and  in  this  anti-democratic  origin  lay 
the  secret  of  its  successes. 

But  it  was  on  British  soil,  too,  that  the  rationalistic  catchwords  had,  one 
and  all,  sprung  up,  and  their  relation  to  the  principles  of  the  Manchester 
School  was  intimate  — Hume  was  the  teacher  of  Adam  Smith.  “Liberty*’ 
self-evidently  meant  intellectual  and  trade  freedom.  An  opposition  between 
fact-politics  and  enthusiasm  for  abstract  truths  was  as  impossible  in  the  England 
of  George  III  as  it  was  inevitable  in  the  France  of  Louis  XVL  Later,  Edmund 
Burke  could  retort  upon  Mirabeau  that  “we  demand  our  liberties,  not  as  rights 
of  man,  but  as  rights  of  Englishmen.”  France  received  her  revolutionary  ideas 
without  exception  from  England,  as  she  had  received  the  style  of  her  absolute 
monarchy  from  Spain.  To  both  she  imparted  a brilliant  and  irresistible  shape 
that  was  taken  as  a model  far  and  wide  over  the  Continent,  but  of  the  practical 
employment  of  either  she  had  no  idea.  The  successful  utilization  of  the  bour- 
geois catchwords  - in  politics  presupposes  the  shrewd  eye  of  a ruling  class  for 
the  intellectual  constitution  of  the  stratum  which  intends  to  attain  power, 
but  will  not  be  capable  of  wielding  it  when  attained.  Hence  in  England  it  was 
successful.  But  it  was  in  England  too  that  money  was  most  unhesitatingly 
used  in  politics  — not  the  bribery  of  individual  high  personages  which  had 
been  customary  in  the  Spanish  or  Venetian  style,  but  the  “nursing”  of  the 
democratic  forces  themselves.  In  eighteenth-century  England,  first  the  Parli- 
amentary elections  and  then  the  decisions  of  the  elected  Commons  were  sys- 
tematically managed  by  money;®  England,  too,  discovered  the  ideal  of  a 
Free  Press,  and  discovered  along  with  it  that  the  press  serves  him  who  owns 
it.  It  does  not  spread  ‘‘  free”  opinion  — it  generates  it. 

Both  together  constitute  liberalism  (in  the  broad  sense);  that  is,  freedom 
from  the  restrictions  of  the  soil-bound  life,  be  these  privileges,  forms,  or  feelings 
— freedom  of  the  intellect  for  every  kind  of  criticism,  freedom  of  money  for 
every  kind  of  business.  But  both,  too,  unhesitatingly  aim  at  the  domination 

^ Both  the  old  parties  possessed  deaf  lines  of  tradition  back  to  1680. 

2 The  moral  and  political  “Enlightenment”  movement  was  in  England  also  a product  of  the 
Third  Estate  (Priestley  and  Paiey,  Paine,  Godwin),  and  for  that  reason  was  unable  to  grasp  things 
with  the  fine  discrimination  of  a Shaftesbury. 

3 Pelham,  the  successor  of  Walpole,  paid  to  members  of  the  Commons,  through  his  secretary, 
£500  to  £800  at  the  end  of  each  session  according  to  the  value  of  the  services  rendered  by  each  re- 
cipient to  the  Government  — i.c.,  the  Whig  party.  The  party  agent  Dodington  described  his  parli- 
amentary activities  in  these  words : “ I never  attended  a debate  if  I could  help  it,  and  I never  missed  a 
division  that  I could  possibly  take  part  in.  I heard  many  arguments  that  convinced  me,  but  never 
one  that  influenced  my  vote.” 


404.  the  decline  of  the  west 

of  a class ^ a domination  which  recognizes  no  overriding  supremacy  of  the 
State.  Mind  and  money,  being  both  inorganic,  want  the  State,  not  as  a ma- 
tured form  of  high  symbolism  to  be  venerated,  but  as  an  engine  to  serve  a 
purpose.  Thus  the  difference  between  these  forces  and  those  of  Frondism  is 
fundamental,  for  the  latter’s  reaction  had  been  a defence  of  the  old  Gothic 
against  the  intrusive  Baroque  way  of  living  and  being  “in  form,”  — and  now 
both  these  are  on  the  defensive  together  and  almost  indistinguishable.  Only 
in  England  (it  must  be  emphasized  again  and  again)  the  Fronde  had  disarmed, 
not  only  the  State  in  open  battle,  but  also  the  Third  Estate  by  its  inward 
superiority,  and  so  attained  to  the  one  kind  of  first-class  form  that  democracy 
is  capable  of  working  up  to,  a form  neither  planned  nor  aped,  but  naturally 
matured,  the  expression  of  an  old  breed  and  an  unbroken  sure  tact  that 
can  adapt  itself  to  the  use  of  every  new  means  that  the  changes  of  Time 
put  into  its  hands.  Thus  it  came  about  that  the  English  Parliament,  while 
taking  part  in  the  Succession- Wars  of  the  Absolute  States,  handled  them  as 
economic  wars  with  business  aims.  The  mistrust  felt  for  high  form  by  the  in- 
wardly formless  Non-Estate  is  so  deep  that  everywhere  and  always  it  is  ready 
to  rescue  its  freedom  — from  all  form  — by  means  of  a dictatorship,  which 
acknowledges  no  rules  and  is,  therefore,  hostile  to  all  that  has  grown  up,  which, 
moreover,  in  virtue  of  its  mechanizing  tendency,  is  acceptable  to  the  taste  both  of 
intellect  and  of  money -- consider,  for  example,  the  structure  of  the  state- 
machine  of  France  which  Robespierre  began  and  Napoleon  completed.  Dicta- 
torship in  the  interests  of  a class-ideal  appealed  to  Rousseau,  Saint-Simon, 
Rodbertus,  and  Lassalle  as  it  had  to  the  Classical  ideologues  of  the  fourth 
century  — Xenophon  in  the  Cyropaedia  and  Isocrates  in  the  Nicocles.^ 

But  the  well-known  saying  of  Robespierre  that  “ the  Government  of  the 
Revolution  is  the  despotism  of  freedom  against  tyranny”  expresses  more  than 
this.  It  lets  out  the  deep  fear  that  shakes  every  multitude  which,  in  the  presence 
of  grave  conjunctures,  feels  itself  “not  up  to  form.”  A regiment  that  is 
shaken  in  its  discipline  will  readily  concede  to  accidental  leaders  of  the  moment 
powers  of  an  extent  and  a kind  which  the  legitimate  command  could  never 
acquire,  and  which  if  legitimate  would  be  utterly  intolerable.  But  this,  on  a 
larger  scale,  is  the  position  of  every  commencing  Civilization.  Nothing  reveals 
more  tellingly  the  decline  of  political  form  than  that  upspringing  of  formless 
powers  which  we  may  conveniently  designate,  from  its  most  conspicuous 
example,  Napoleonism.  How  completely  the  being  of  Richelieu  or  of  Wallenstein 
was  involved  in  the  unshakable  antecedents  of  their  period ! And  how  instinct 
with  form,  under  all  its  outer  unform,  was  the  English  Revolution!  Here,  just 
the  reverse;  the  Fronde  fights  about  xh.c  form,  the  absolute  State  in  the  form, 

^ Here  it  was  actually  the  interest  of  bourgeois  and  ‘ ' enlightenment”  ideals  that  the  personal 
regime  of  dictatorship  was  thought  to  favour,  for  the  opposition  to  these  ideas  lay  in  the  strict 
state-ideal  of  the  Polis,  which  according  to  Isocrates  was  marked  with  the  curse  of  inability  to  die. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  405 

but  the  bourgeoisie  against  the  form.  The  mere  abolition  of  an  order  that  had 
become  obsolete  was  no  novelty  — Cromwell  and  the  heads  of  the  First  Tyran- 
nis  had  done  that.  But,  that  behind  the  ruins  of  the  visible  there  is  no  longer 
the  substance  of  an  invisible  form;  that  Robespierre  and  Napoleon  find  nothing 
either  around  or  in  them  to  provide  the  self-evident  basis  essential  to  any  new 
creation;  that  for  a government  of  high  tradition  and  experience  they  have 
no  choice  but  to  substitute  an  accidental  regime,  whose  future  no  longer  rests 
secure  on  the  qualities  of  a slowly  and  thoroughly  trained  minority,  but  de- 
pends entirely  on  the  chance  of  the  adequate  successor  turning  up  •—  such 
are  the  distinguishing  marks  of  this  turning  of  the  times,  and  hence  comes  the 
immense  superiority  that  is  enjoyed  for  generations  still  by  those  states  which 
manage  to  retain  a tradition  longer  than  others. 

The  First  Tyrannis  had  completed  the  Polls  with  the  aid  of  the  non-noble; 
the  latter  now  destroyed  it  with  the  aid  of  the  Second  Tyrannis.  As  an  idea,  it 
perishes  in  the  bourgeois  revolutions  of  the  fourth  century,  for  all  that  it  may 
persist  as  an  arrangement  or  a habit  or  an  instrument  of  the  momentary  powers 
that  be.  Classical  man  never  ceased,  in  fact,  to  think  and  live  politically  in  its 
form.  But  never  more  was  it  for  the  multitude  a symbol  to  be  respected  and 
venerated,  any  more  than  the  Divine  Right  of  Kings  was  venerated  in  the  West 
after  Napoleon  had  almost  succeeded  in  making  his  own  dynasty  “the  oldest 
in  Europe.” 

Further,  in  these  revolutions  too,  as  ever  in  Classical  history,  there  were 
only  local  and  temporary  solutions  nothing  resembling  the  splendid  sweep 
of  the  French  Revolution  from  the  Bastille  to  Waterloo  — and  the  scenes  in 
them  were  more  atrocious  still,  for  the  reason  that  in  this  Culture,  with  its 
basically  Euclidean  feeling,  the  only  possible  way  seemed  to  be  that  of  physical 
collision  of  party  against  party,  and  the  only  possible  end  for  the  loser,  not 
functional  incorporation  in  the  victor’s  system  as  in  the  West,  but  destruction 
root  and  branch.  At  Corcyra  (4^7)  and  Argos  (370)  the  possessing  classes 
were  slaughtered  en  masse;  in  Leontini  (4x2.)  they  were  expelled  from  the  city 
by  the  lower  classes,  which  carried  on  affairs  for  a while  with  slaves  until,  in 
fear  of  an  avenging  return,  they  evacuated  altogether  and  migrated  to  Syracuse. 
The  refugees  from  hundreds  of  these  revolutions  inundated  the  cities,  recruited 
the  mercenary  armies  of  the  Second  Tyrannis,  and  infested  the  routes  by  land 
and  sea.  The  readmission  of  such  exiled  fractions  is  a standing  feature  in  the 
peace-terms  offered  by  the  Diadochi  and  later  by  the  Romans.  But  the  Second 
Tyrannis  itself  secured  its  positions  by  acts  of  this  kind.  Dionysius  I (407-367) 
secured  his  hegemony  over  Syracuse  — the  city  in  whose  higher  society,  along 
with  that  of  Athens,  centred  the  ripest  culture  of  Hellas,  the  city  where 
.^schylus  had  produced  his  Persian  trilogy  in  470  — by  wholesale  executions 
of  educated  people  and  confiscations  of  their  property;  this  he  followed  up  by 
entirely  rebuilding  the  population,  in  the  upper  levels  by  granting  large  proper- 


4o6  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

ties  to  his  adherents,  and  in  the  lower  by  raising  masses  of  slaves  to  the  citizen- 
ship and  distributing  amongst  them  (as  was  not  uncommon)  the  wives  and 
daughters  of  the  victims.^ 

After  the  characteristically  Classical  fashion,  the  type  of  these  revolutions 
was  such  as  to  produce  always  an  increase  of  number,  never  of  extent.  Multi- 
tudes of  them  happened,  but  each  proceeded  purely  for  itself  and  at  one  point 
of  its  own,  and  it  is  only  the  fact  that  they  were  contemporary  with  one  another 
that  gives  them  the  character  of  a collective  phenomenon,  which  marks  an 
epoch.  Similarly  with  Napoleonism;  here  again,  a formless  regimen  for  the 
first  time  raised  itself  above  the  framework  of  the  State,  yet  without  being 
able  to  attain  to  complete  inward  detachment  therefrom.  It  supported  itself 
on  the  Army,  which,  vis-h-vis  the  nation  that  had  lost  its  “form,”  began  to 
feel  itself  as  an  independent  power.  That  is  the  brief  road  from  Robespierre  to 
Bonaparte  — with  the  fall  of  the  Jacobins  the  centre  of  gravity  passed  from  the 
administration  to  the  ambitious  generals.  How  deeply  this  new  tendency 
implanted  itself  in  the  West  may  be  seen  from  the  example  of  Bernadette  and 
Wellington,  and  even  more  from  the  story  of  Frederick  William  IIFs  “ call  to 
my  People”  in  1813  — in  this  case  the  continuance  of  the  dynasty  would 
have  been  challenged  by  the  military  had  not  the  King  stiffened  himself  to 
break  with  Napoleon.^ 

This  anti-constitutionality  of  the  Second  Tyrannis  declared  itself  also  in 
the  position  taken  by  Alcibiades  and  Lysander  in  the  armed  forces  of  their 
respective  cities  during  the  latter  stages  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  a position 
incompatible  with  the  basic  form  of  the  Polis.  The  first-named,  destitute  as  an 
exile  of  official  position,  and  against  the  will  of  the  home  authorities,  exercised 
from  41 1 the  de  facto  command  of  the  Athenian  Navy;  the  second,  though 
not  even  a Spartiate,  felt  himself  entirely  independent  at  the  head  of  an  army 
devoted  to  his  person.  In  the  year  408  the  contest  of  the  two  powers  for  the 
supremacy  over  the  .^Egean  world  took  the  form  of  a contest  between  these  two 
individuals.^  Shortly  after  this,  Dionysius  of  Syracuse  built  up  the  first  large- 
scale  professional  army  and  introduced  engines  of  war  (artillery)  ^ — a new 
form  which  served  as  a model  for  the  Diadochi  and  Rome  also.  Thereafter 
the  spirit  of  the  army  was  a political  power  on  its  own  account,  and  it  became  a 
serious  question  how  far  the  State  was  master,  and  how  far  tool,  of  its  army. 

^ Diodorus  XIV,  7.  The  drama  was  repeated  in  317,  when  Agathocles  the  ex-potter  let  loose 
his  mercenary  bands  and  the  mob  upon  the  new  upper  classes-  After  the  massacre  the  “people” 
of  the  “purified  city’'  assembled  and  conferred  the  dictaturc  upon  the  “saviour  of  true  and  genuine 
freedom”  (Dcodorus  XIX,  6,  et  scq.).  On  the  whole  movement  sec  Busolt,  Griech.  Stadtskmde, 

396,  ct  scq.,  and  Pohlmann,  Gesch.  d,  sot.  Frage,  I,  pp.  416,  et  scq. 

^ Already  that  part  of  the  Prussian  army  which  had  been  in  Russia  had  declared  against  Na- 
poleon — and  that,  though  its  general,  Yorck,  was  no  liberal,  but  the  old  strict  type  of  the  Frcdcri- 
cian  officer.  — Tr. 

® Ed.  Meyer,  Gesch.  d.  Alt.,  IV,  §§  6x6,  630. 

^ H.  Delbriick,  (1908},  I,  p-  14X- 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  407 

The  fact  that  the  government  of  Rome  was  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  a mili- 
tary committee  ^ from  390  to  3672  reveals  pretty  clearly  that  the  army  had 
a policy  of  its  own.  It  is  well  known  that  Alexander,  the  Romanticist  of  the 
Second  Tyrannis,  fell  more  and  more  under  the  influence  of  his  generals,  who 
not  only  compelled  the  retreat  from  India  but  also  disposed  of  his  inheritance 
amongst  themselves  as  a matter  of  course. 

This  is  essentially  Napoleonism,  and  so  is  the  extension  of  personal  rule  over 
regions  united  by  ties  neither  national  nor  jural,  but  merely  military  and  ad- 
ministrative. But  extension  was  just  what  was  essentially  incompatible  with 
the  Polls.  The  Classical  State  is  the  one  State  that  was  incapable  of  any  organic 
widening,  and  the  conquests  of  the  Second  Tyrannis  therefore  resolved  them- 
selves into  a juxtaposition  of  two  political  units^  the  Polls  and  the  subjugated 
territory,  the  cohesion  of  which  was  initially  accidental  and  perpetually  in 
danger.  Thus  arose  that  strange  picture  of  the  Hellenistic-Roman  world,  the 
true  significance  of  which  is  not  even  yet  recogni2:ed  — a circle  of  border-regions^ 
and  within  them  a congeries  of  Poleis  to  which,  small  as  they  were,  the  con- 
ception of  the  State  proper,  the  res  publica,  continued  to  be  bound  as  exclusively 
as  ever.  In  this  middle  (indeed,  so  far  as  concerned  each  individual,  hegemony 
was  in  one  point)  was  the  theatre  of  ail  real  politics.  The  orbis  terrarum*[  — 
a significant  expression  — was  merely  a means  or  object  to  it.  The  Roman 
notions  of  ''  imperium'  — dictatorial  powers  of  administration  outside  the  city 
moat  (which  were  automatically  extinguished  when  its  holder  entered  the 
Pomoerium)  — and  of  provincial*  as  the  opposite  of  “ w puhlicaf*  express  the 
common  Classical  instinct,  which  knew  only  the  city’s  body  as  the  State  and 
political  subject,  and  the  outside”  only  in  relation  to  it,  as  object  to  it. 
Dionysius  made  his  city  of  Syracuse  into  a fortress  surrounded  by  a ” scrap-heap 
of  states,”  and  extended  his  field  of  power  thence,  over  Upper  Italy  and  the 
Dalmatian  coast,  into  the  northern  Adriatic,  where  he  possessed  Ancona  and 
Hatria  at  the  mouth  of  the  Po.  Philip  of  Macedon,  following  the  example  of  his 
teacher  Jason  of  Phera:  (murdered  in  370),  adopted  the  reverse  plan,  placing 
his  centre  of  gravity  in  the  periphery  (that  is,  practically  in  the  army)  and 
thence  exercising  a hegemony  over  the  Hellenic  world  of  States,  Thus  Mace- 
donia came  to  extend  to  the  Danube,  and  after  Alexander’s  death  there  were 
added  to  this  outer  circle  the  empires  of  the  Seleucids  and  the  Ptolemies  — ■ 

^ Tiirec  to  six  ‘ * trihmi  militares  consnlari  frotesute”  instead  of  the  Consuls.  Just  at  this  juncture, 
as  the  result  of  the  introduction  of  pay  and  longer  duration  of  service  with  the  colours,  there  must 
have  come  into  being  a nucleus  of  true  professional  soldiers,  who  would  have  the  election  of  cen- 
turions in  their  own  hands  and  by  whom  the  spirit  of  the  army  was  determined.  It  is  entirely 
erroneous  to  speak  of  a peasant-levy  at  this  stage,  quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  four  great  city- 
tribes  contributed  a considerable  part  of  the  rank  and  file  and  a part,  too,  whose  influence  was  even 
greater  than  its  numerical  strength.  Even  in  the  “good  old  days’*  picture  presented  to  us  by  Livy  and 
others  we  can  clearly  perceive  the  influence  exerted  by  the  standing  formations  upon  the  contests  oi 
parties.  ^ 

^ It  IS  perhaps  not  a mere  coincidence  that  367  is  the  year  of  Dionysius’s  death. 


4o8  the  decline  OF,  THE  WEST 

each,  go'verrieci  from  a Polls  (;Aatiocfa,  Alexandria),  but  through  the  Inter- 
mediary of  existing  native  machinery,  which,  be  it  said,  was  at  its  lowest  better 
than  any  Classical  administration  of  it  could  have  been.  Rome  herself  in  the 
same  period  (r.  3^6~^65)  built  up  her  Middle-Italian  territory  as  a border  stafe^ 
secured  in  all  directions  by  a system  of  colonies,  allies,  and  settlements  with 
Latin  right.  Then,  from  137,  we  find  Hamilcar  Barca  winning  for  Carthage,  a 
city  old  established  in  the  Classical  way  of  life,  an  empire  in  Spain;  C.  Flaminius 
(xx5)  conquering  the  Po  Valley  for  Rome;  and  finally  Cassar  making  his  Gallic 
empire.  These  were  the  foundations  upon  which  rested,  first,  the  Napoleonic 
struggles  of  the  Diadochi  in  the  East,  then  those  of  Scipio  and  Hannibal  in  the 
West  — the  limits  of  the  Polis  outgrown  in  both  cases  — and  lastly  the  Cesar- 
ian struggles  of  the  Triumvirs,  who  supported  themselves  on  the  total  oi  all 
the  border  states  and  used  their  means,  in  order  to  be  — “the  first  in  Rome/* 

VII 

In  Rome  the  strong  and  happily  conceived  form  of  the  State  that  was 
reached  about  340  kept  the  social  revolution  within  constitutional  limits. 
A Napoleonic  figure  like  Appius  Claudius  the  Censor  of  310,  who  built  the  first 
aqueduct  and  the  Appian  Way,  and  ruled  in  Rome  almost  as  a tyrant,  very 
soon  failed  when  he  tried  to  eliminate  the  peasantry  by  means  of  the  great-city 
masses  and  so  to  impart  the  one-sided  Athenian  direction  to  politics  — for 
that  was  his  aim  in  taking  up  the  sons  of  slaves  into  the  Senate,  in  reorgani2:ing 
the  Centuries  on  a money  instead  of  a land-assessment  basis,  ^ and  in  distributing 
freedmen  and  landless  men  amongst  the  country  tribes,  so  that  they  might 
outvote  the  rustics  (as  they  were  always  able  to  do,  since  the  latter  rarely  at- 
tended), But  his  successors  in  the  censorship  lost  no  time  in  reversing  this,  and 
relegated  the  landless  to  the  great  city-tribes  again.  The  non-estate  itself,  well 
led  by  a minority  of  distinguished  families,  saw  its  aim  (as  has  been  said  before) 
not  in  the  destruction,  but  in  the  acquisition,  of  the  senatorial  organs  of 
administration.  In  the  end,  it  forced  its  way  into  all  offices  (even,  by  the  Lex 
Ogulnia,  of  300,  into  the  politically  important  priesthoods  of  the  Pontifices 
and  Augurs),  and  by  the  outbreak  of  zSy  it  secured  force  of  iot  fkbisdta 
even  without  the  Senate’s  approval. 

The  practical  result  of  this  freedom-movement  was  precisely  the  reverse  of 
that  which  ideologues  would  have  expected  — there  were  no  idealogues  in 
Rome,  The  greatness  of  its  success  robbed  the  non-estate  of  its  object  and 
thereby  deprived  it  of  its  driving  force,  for  positively,  when  not  “in  oppo- 
sition,” it  was  null.  After  zBy  the  state-form  existed  for  the  purpose  of  being 
politically  used,  and  used,  too,  in  a world  in  which  only  the  states  of  the  great 
fringe  — Rome,  Carthage,  Macedonia,  Syria,  and  Egypt — really  counted. 
It  had  ceased  to  be  in  any  danger  of  becoming  the  passive  of  “peoples ’-rights” 
1 According  to  K.  J.  Neumann,  this  goes  back  to  the  great  Censor. 


■STATE  AND  HISTORY  409 

activities.  And  it  was  precisel7  this  security  that  formed  the  basis  on  which  the 
one  people  that  had  remained  “in  form*'  rose  to  its  grandeur. 

On  the  one  hand,  it  had  deveioped  within  the  Plebs,  formless  and  long 
weakened  in  its  race-impulses  by  the  mass-intake  of  freedmen,^  an  upper  stratum 
distinguished  by  great  practical  aptitudes,  rank,  and  wealth,  which  |oined 
forces  with  a corresponding  stratum  within  the  patriciate.  Hence  there  came 
into  existence  a very  narrow  circle  of  men  of  the  strongest  race-quality,  dig- 
nified life,  and  broad  political  outlook,  in  whom  the  whole  stock  of  experience 
in  governing  and  generalship  and  negotiation  was  concentrated  and  transmitted; 
who  regarded  the  direction  of  the  State  as  the  one  profession  worthy  of  their 
status,  considered  themselves  as  inheritors  of  a privilege  to  exercise  it,  and 
educated  their  children  solely  in  the  art  of  ruling  and  the  convictions  of  a 
measurelessly  proud  tradition.  This  nobility,  which  as  such  had  no  constitu- 
tional existence,  found  its  constitutional  engine  in  the  Senate,  which  had 
originally  been  a body  representing  the  interests  of  the  patricians  (that  is,  the 
“Homeric**  aristocracy),  but  in  which  from  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century 
ex-consuls  — men  who  had  both  ruled  and  commanded  — sat  as  life-members, 
forming  a close  group  of  eminent  talents  that  dominated  the  assembly  and, 
through  it,  the  State.  Even  by  ^79  the  Senate  appeared  to  Cineas,  the  am- 
bassador of  Pyrrhus,  like  a council  of  kings,  and  finally  its  kernel  was  a small 
group  of  leading  men,  holding  the  titles  and  clanssimus^*'  men 

in  every  respect  — rank,  power,  and  public  dignity  — the  peers  of  those  who 
reigned  over  the  empires  of  the  Diadochi.^  There  came  into  being  a govern- 
ment such  as  no  megalopolis  in  any  other  Culture  whatsoever  has  possessed, 
and  a tradition  to  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  parallels  save  perhaps 
in  the  Venice  and  the  Papal  Curia  of  the  Baroque,  and  there  under  a wholly 
different  set  of  conditions.  Here  were  no  theories  such  as  had  been  the  ruin  of 
Athens,  none  of  the  provincialism  that  had  made  Sparta  in  the  long  run  con- 
temptible, but  simply  a praxis  in  the  grand  style.  If  “Rome”  is  a perfectly 
unique  and  marvellous  phenomenon  in  world-history,  it  is  due,  not  to  the  Ro- 

^ Accordiog  to  Roman  law,  the  freed  slave  at  once  acquired  citmenship,  with  some  few  limi- 
tations. As  the  siavc-matcrial  came  from  all  over  the  Mediterranean  region  and  most  of  all  from  the 
East,  it  was  a vast  rootless  mass  that  collected  in  the  four  urban  tribes,  alien  from  all  the  tendencies 
of  the  old  Roman  blood;  and  it  quickly  destroyed  these  when,  after  the  Gracchan  movement,  it  had 
succeeded  in  bringing  its  weight  of  numbers  to  bear  with  effect. 

® From  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  the  nobility  developed  into  a closed  circle  of  families  that 
had,  or  claimed  to  have,  consuls  among  their  ancestors.  The  more  strictly  this  condition  was  en- 
forced, the  more  frequent  were  the  falsifications  of  the  old  consul-lists  in  order  to  “ legitimize*'  rising 
families  of  strong  race  and  talent.  The  first  (and  truly  revolutionary)  outburst  of  forgery  occurs 
in  the  epoch  of  Appius  Claudius  the  Censor,  when  the  curule  asdilc  C.  Flavius,  the  son  of  a slave, 
put  the  list  in  order  — that  was  the  time  when  even  royal  cognomina  were  discovered  amongst 
plebeian  families.  The  second  was  in  the  days  of  the  battle  of  Pydna  (ibS),  when  the  dominance  of 
the  nobility  began  to  assume  Cxsarian  forms  (E.  Kornemann,  Der  Friesterkodex  in  der  Regia,  pp. 

56,  et  seq.).  Of  the  zoo  Consulates  bstween  X3z.  and  133,  159  fell  to  z6  families,  and  thereafter  — 
blood-quality  being  exhausted,  but  the  form  as  such  being  all  the  more  studiously  preserved  in 
consequence  — the  rise  of  mvi  homines  like  Cato  and  Cicero  became  a rare  phenomenon. 


4X0  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

man  “people/’  which  in  itself,  like  my  other,  was  raw  material  without  form, 
but  to  this  class  which  brought  Rome  into  condition  and  kept  her  so,  willy- 
nilly  —-  with  the  result  that  this  particular  stream  of  being,  which  in  350  was 
still  without  importance  save  to  middle  Italy,  gradually  drew  into  its  bed  the 
entire  history  of  the  Classical,  and  made  the  last  great  period  of  that  history  a 
Roman  period. 

It  was  the  very  perfection  of  political  flair  that  was  displayed  by  this  small 
circle  (which  possessed  no  sort  of  public  rights)  in  managing  the  democratic 
forms  created  by  the  Revolution  — forms  that  here  as  elsewhere  derive  all 
value  from  the  use  that  is  made  of  them.  The  only  factor  in  them  that  if 
mishandled  would  have  been  dangerous  in  an  instant  — namely,  the  inter- 
penetration of  two  mutually  exclusive  powers  — was  handled  so  superbly 
and  so  quietly  that  it  was  always  the  higher  experience  that  gave  the  note,  while 
the  people  remained  throughout  convinced  that  decisions  were  made  by,  and 
in  the  sense  desired  by,  itself.  To  he  popular,  and  yet  historically  successful  in  the 
highest  degree  — here  is  the  secret  of  this  policy,  and  for  that  matter  the  only 
possibility  of  policy  existing  at  all  in  such  times,  an  art  in  which  the  Roman 
regime  has  remained  unequalled  to  this  day. 

Nevertheless,  on  the  other  side  of  the  picture,  the  result  of  the  Revolution 
was  the  emancipation  of  Money.  Thenceforward  money  was  master  in  the  Comitia 
Centuriata.  That  which  called  itself  *'populus**  there  became  more  and  more 
a tool  in  the  hands  of  big  money,  and  it  required  all  the  tactical  superiority  of 
the  ruling  circles  to  maintain  a counterpoise  in  the  Plebs,  and  to  keep  effective 
a representation  of  the  yeomanry,  under  the  leadership  of  the  noble  families,  in 
the  thirty-one  country  tribes  from  which  the  great  city  mass  continued  to  be 
excluded.  Hence  the  drastic  energy  with  which  the  arrangements  made  by 
Appius  Claudius  were  revoked.  The  natural  alliance  between  high  finance 
and  the  mass,  though  we  see  it  actually  at  work  later  (under  the  Gracchi  and 
Marius)*  for  the  destruction  of  the  tradition  of  the  blood,  ^ was  at  any  rate 
made  impossible  for  many  generations.  Bourgeoisie  and  yeomanry,  money  and 
landowning,  maintained  a reciprocal  equilibrium  of  separate  organisms,  and 
were  held  together  and  made  efficient  by  the  State-idea  (of  which  the  nobility 
was  the  incarnation)  until  this  inward  form  fell  to  pieces,  and  the  two  tendencies 
broke  apart  in  enmity.  The  First  Punic  War  was  a traders*  war  and  directed 
against  the  agrarian  interest,  and,  therefore,  the  consul  Appius  Claudius  (a 
descendant  of  the  great  Censor)  laid  the  decision  of  the  matter  in  z84  before  the 
Comitia  Centuriata.  The  conquest  of  the  Po  plain,  on  the  other  hand,  was  in 
the  interests  of  the  peasantry  and  it  was,  therefore,  in  the  Comita  Tributa  that 
it  was  carried  by  the  Tribune  C.  Flaminius  the  first  genuinely  Caesarian  type 
in  Roman  history,  builder  of  the  Via  Flaminia  and  the  Circus  Flaminius. 
But  when  in  pursuance  of  his  policy  he  (as  Censor  in  iio)  forbade  the  Senators 
^ Another  instance,  among  many,  is  its  role  in  preparing  the  German  crash  of  1318. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  411 

to  engage  in  trade,  and  also  at  the  same  time  made  the  old  noble  centuries 
accessible  to  plebeians,  he  was  practically  benefiting  only  the  new  financial 
nobility  of  the  First  Punic  War  period,  and  thus  (entirely  in  spite  of  himself) 
he  became  the  creator  of  high  finance  organized  as  an  Estate  — that  is,  that  of  the 
Equites,  who  a century  later  put  an  end  to  the  great  age  of  the  nobility.  Hence- 
forth, when  Hannibal  (before  whom  Flaminius  had  fallen  on  the  field  of  battle) 
had  been  disposed  of,  money  steadily  became,  even  for  the  government  as  such, 
the  "ultima  ratio"'  in  the  accomplishment  of  its  policy  — the  last  true  State- 
policy  that  the  Classical  world  was  to  know. 

When  the  Scipios  and  their  circle  had  ceased  to  be  the  governing  influence, 
nothing  remained  but  the  private  policies  of  individuals,  who  followed  their 
own  interests  without  scruple,  and  looked  upon  the  " orhis  terrarum"  zs  passive 
booty.  The  historian  Polybius  (who  belonged  to  that  circle)  regarded  Flaminius 
as  a mere  demagogue  and  traced  to  him  all  the  misfortunes  of  the  Gracchan 
period.  He  was  wholly  in  error  as  to  Flaminius ’s  intentions,  but  he  was  right 
as  to  his  effect.  Flaminius  — like  the  elder  Cato,  who  with  the  blind  zeal  of 
the  agrarian  overthrew  the  great  Scipio  on  account  of  his  world-policy  — 
achieved  the  reverse  of  what  he  intended.  Money  stepped  into  the  place  of 
blood-leadership,  and  money  took  less  than  three  generations  to  exterminate  the 
yeomanry. 

If  it  was  an  improbable  piece  of  good  luck  in  the  destinies  of  the  Classical 
peoples  that  Rome  was  the  only  city-state  to  survive  the  Revolution  with  an 
unimpaired  constitution,  it  was,  on  the  contrary,  almost  a miracle  that  in  our 
West  — with  its  genealogical  forms  deep-rooted  in  the  idea  of  duration  — 
violent  revolution  broke  out  at  all,  even  in  one  place  — namely,  Paris.  It  was 
not  the  strength,  but  the  weakness  of  French  Absolutism  which  brought  the 
English  ideas,  in  combination  with  the  power  of  money,  to  the  point  of  an 
explosion  which  gave  living  form  to  the  catchwords  of  the  “Enlightenment,” 
which  bound  together  virtue  and  terror,  freedom  and  despotism,  and  which 
echoed  still  even  in  the  minor  catastrophes  of  1830  and  1848  and  the  more 
recent  Socialistic  longing  for  catastrophe.^  In  England  itself,  when  the  aristoc- 

^ And  even  in  France,  where  the  judicial  class  in  the  parlements  openly  scorned  the  Government, 
and  with  impunity  tore  down  royal  proclamations  from  the  wails  and  put  up  their  own  arrts 
instead  (R.  Holtzmann,  Vrantps.  Verjassangsgesch.  p.  where  “orders  were  given,  but 

not  obeyed,  laws  enacted,  but  not  executed’'  QA,  Wshl,Vorgexch,  d,  franz  1, 2.9  and  passim); 

where  high  finance  could  overthrow  Turgot  and  anyone  else  whose  reform-schemes  disquieted 
it;  where  the  whole  educated  world,  headed  by  princes  and  nobles,  prelates  and  generals,  was 
Anglomaniac  and  applauded  opposition  in  any  shape  or  form  — even  there  nothing  would  have 
happened  but  for  the  sudden  concurrence  of  a set  of  incidents  — the  fashion  which  set  in  amongst 
French  officers  of  aiding  the  American  republicans  in  their  struggle  with  the  English  King;  the 
diplomatic  reverse  in  Holland  (17  Oct.  1787)  in  the  middle  of  the  reforming  activity  of  the  Govern- 
ment; and  the  perpetual  change  of  ministers  under  pressure  from  irresponsible  quarters.  In  the 
British  Empire,  the  falling-away  of  the  Colonies  was  the  result  of  attempts  of  high-Tory  circles 
(in  collusion  with  George  III,  but  in  reality  of  course  in  their  own  interests)  to  strengthen  the 
Royal  power.  This  party  possessed  in  the  Colonies  a strong  contingent  of  royalists,  notably  in  the 


411  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

racy  ruled  more  absolutely  than  ever  in  France,  there  was  certainly  a small 
circle  round  Fox  and  Sheridan  which  was  enthusiastic  for  the  ideas  of  the 
Revolution  — all  of  which  were  of  English  provenance  — and  men  talked  of 
universal  suffrage  and  Parliamentary  reform.^  But  that  was  quite  enough  to 
induce  both  parties,  under  the  leadership  of  a Whig  (the  younger  Pitt),  to  take 
the  sharpest  measures  to  defeat  any  and  every  attempt  to  interfere  in  the  slightest 
degree  with  the  aristocratic  regime  for  the  benefit  of  the  bourgeoisie.  The 
English  nobility  let  loose  the  twenty-year  war  against  France,  and  mobilised 
all  the  monarchs  of  Europe  to  bring  about  in  the  end,  not  the  fall  of  Napoleon, 
but  the  fall  of  the  Revolution  — the  Revolution  that  had  had  the  naive  daring 
to  introduce  the  opinions  of  private  English  thinkers  into  practical  politics,  and 
so  to  give  a position  to  the  Tiers  Etat  of  which  the  consequences  were  all  the 
better  foreseen  in  the  English  lobbies  for  having  been  overlooked  in  the  Paris 
salons.^ 

What  was  called  “Opposition’*  in  England  was  — the  attitude  of  one 
aristocratic  party  while  the  other  was  running  the  Government.  It  did  not 
mean  there,  as  it  meant  all  over  the  Continent,  professional  criticism  of  the  work 
which  it  was  someone  else’s  profession  to  do,  but  the  practical  endeavour  to 
force  the  activity  of  Government  into  a form  in  which  the  opposition  was 
ready  and  fit  at  any  moment  to  take  it  over.  But  this  Opposition  was  at  once  — 
and  in  complete  ignorance  of  its  social  presuppositions  — taken  as  a model  for 
that  which  the  educated  in  France  and  elsewhere  aimed  at  creating,  namely, 
a class-domination  of  the  Tiers  Etat  under  the  eyes  of  a dynasty,  no  very 
clear  idea  being  formed  as  to  the  latter’s  future.  The  English  dispositions  were, 
from  Montesquieu  onwards,  lauded  with  enthusiastic  misunderstanding  — 
although  these  Continental  countries,  not  being  islands,  lacked  the  first  con- 
dition precedent  for  an  “English”  evolution.  Only  in  one  point  was  England 
really  a model.  When  the  bourgeoisie  had  got  so  far  as  to  turn  the  absolute 
state  back  again  into  an  Estate-state,  they  found  over  there  a picture  which  in 
fact  had  never  been  other  than  it  was.  True,  it  was  the  aristocracy  alone 
who  ruled  in  it  — but  at  least  it  was  not  the  Crown. 

The  result  of  the  turn,  and  the  basic  form  of  the  Continental  States  at  the 


South;  these  elements,  fightitig  on  the  British  side,  decided  the  battle  of  Camdcii,  and  after  the 
final  victory  of  the  rebels  mostly  emigrated  to  Canada,  which  had  remained  loyal. 

^ In  1793  ^bcrc  were  306  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  who  were  elected  by  160  persons 
in  all.  Old  Sarum,  the  constituency  of  the  elder  Pitt,  consisted  of  one  tenement,  returning  two  mem- 
bers. 

2 Afterwards  — from  i83x  — the  English  nobility  Itself,  through  a scries  of  prudent  measures, 
drew  the  bourgeoisie  into  co-operation  with  it,  but  under  its  continued  guidance  and,  above  all,  in  the 
framework  of  tradition,  within  which  consequently  the  young  talent  grew  up.  Democracy  thus 
actualized  itself  here  so  that  the  Government  remained  strictly  “in  form*’  — the  old  aristocratic 
form  — while  the  individual  was  free  to  practise  politics  according  to  his  bent.  This  transition, 
in  a pcasantless  society  dominated  by  business  interests,  was  the  most  remarkable  achievement  of 
inner  politics  in  the  nineteenth  century. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  4x3 

beginning  of  the  Civiliisation,  is  “Constitutional  Monarch7/*  the  extreinest 
possibility  of  which  appears  as  what  we  call  nowadays  a Republic.  It  is  neces- 
sary to  get  clear,  once  and  for  all,  of  the  mumblings  of  the  doctrinaires  who 
think  in  timeless  and  therefore  unreal  concepts  and  for  whom  “Republic 'Ms  a 
form-in-itself.  The  republican  ideal  of  the  nineteenth  century  has  no  more 
resemblance  to  the  Classical  res  publica,  or  even  to  Venice  or  the  original  Swiss 
cantons,  than  the  English  constitution  to  a “constitution"  in  the  Continental 
sense.  That  which  we  call  republic  is  a negation^  which  of  inward  necessity 
postulates  that  the  thing  denied  is  an  ever-present  possibility.  It  is  non-mon- 
archy in  forms  borrowed  from  the  monarchy.  The  genealogical  feeling  is 
immensely  strong  in  Western  mankind;  it  strains  its  conscience  so  far  as  to 
pretend  that  Dynasty  determines  its  political  conduct  even  when  Dynasty 
no  longer  exists  at  all.  The  historical  is  embodied  therein,  and  unhistorically 
we  cannot  live.  It  makes  a great  difference  whether,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Classical  world,  the  dynastic  principle  conveys  absolutely  nothing  to  the  inner 
feelings  of  a man,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  the  West,  it  is  real  enough  to  need  six 
generations  of  educated  people  to  fight  it  down  in  themselves.  Feeling  is  the 
secret  enemy  of  all  constitutions  that  are  plans  and  not  growths;  they  are  in 
last  analysis  nothing  but  defensive  measures  born  of  fear  and  mistrust.  The 
urban  conception  of  freedom  — freedom  from  something  — narrows  itself  to  a 
merely  anti-dynastic  significance,  and  republican  enthusiasm  lives  only  on  this 
feeling. 

Such  a negation  inevitably  involves  a preponderance  of  theory.  While 
Dynasty  and  its  close  congener  Diplomacy  conserve  the  old  tradition  and  pulse. 
Constitutions  contain  an  overweight  of  systems,  bookishness,  and  framed 
concepts  — such  as  is  entirely  unthinkable  in  England,  where  nothing  negative 
and  defensive  adheres  to  the  form  of  government.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that 
the  Faustian  is  par  excellence  the  reading  and  writing  Culture.  The  printed  book 
is  an  emblem  of  temporal,  the  Press  of  spatial,  infinity.  In  contrast  with  the 
inimense  power  and  tyranny  of  these  symbols,  even  the  Chinese  Civilization 
seems  almost  empty  of  writing.  In  Constitutions,  literature  is  put  into  the 
field  against  knowledge  of  men  and  things,  language  against  race,  abstract 
right  against  successful  tradition  — regardless  of  whether  a nation  involved 
in  the  tide  of  events  is  still  capable  of  work  and  “maintaining  its  form." 
Mirabeau  was  quite  alone  and  unsuccessful  in  combating  the  Assembly,  which 
“confused  politics  with  fiction."  Not  only  the  three  doctrinaire  constitu- 
tions of  the  age  — the  French  of  1791,  the  German  of  1848  and  1919  — but 
practically  all  such  attempts  shut  their  eyes  to  the  great  Destiny  in  the  fact- 
world  and  imagine  that  that  is  the  same  as  defeating  it.  In  lieu  of  unforeseen 
happenings,  the  incidents  of  strong  personality  and  imperious  circumstances, 
it  is  Causality  that  is  to  rule  — timeless,  just,  unvarying,  rational  cohesion 
of  cause  and  effect.  It  is  symptomatic  that  no  written  constitution  knows  of 
money  as  a political  force.  It  is  pure  theory  that  they  contain,  one  and  all. 


414  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

This  rift  in  the  essence  of  constitutional  monarchy  is  irremediable.  Here 
actual  and  conceptual,  work  and  critique,  arc  frontally  opposed,  and  it  is  their 
mutual  attrition  that  constitutes  what  the  average  educated  man  calls  internal 
politics.  Apart  from  the  cases  of  Prussia-Germany  and  Austria — where 
constitutions  did  come  into  existence  at  first,^  but  in  the  presence  of  the  older 
political  traditions  were  never  very  influential  — it  was  only  in  England  that 
the  practice  of  government  kept  itself  homogeneous.  Here,  race  held  its  own 
against  principle.  Men  had  more  than  an  inkling  that  real  politics,  politics 
aiming  at  historical  success,  is  a matter  of  training  and  not  of  shaping.  This 
was  no  aristocratic  prejudice,  but  a cosmic  fact  that  emerges  much  more  dis- 
tinctly in  the  experience  of  any  English  racehorse-trainer  than  in  all  the 
philosophical  systems  in  the  world.  Shaping  can  refine  training,  but  not  re- 
place it.  And  thus  the  higher  society  of  England,  Eton  and  Balliol,  became 
training-grounds  where  politicians  were  worked  up  with  a consistent  sureness 
the  like  of  which  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  training  of  the  Prussian  officer- 
corps  — trained,  that  is,  as  connoisseurs  and  masters  of  the  underlying  pulse 
of  things  (not  excluding  the  hidden  course  of  opinions  and  ideas).  Thus 
prepared,  they  were  able,  in  the  great  flood  of  bourgeois-revolutionary  principles 
that  swept  over  the  years  after  i83Z,  to  preserve  and  control  the  being-stream 
which  they  directed.  They  possessed  “training,”  the  suppleness  and  collected- 
ness of  the  rider  who,  with  a good  horse  under  him,  feels  victory  coming  nearer 
and  nearer.  They  allowed  the  great  principles  to  move  the  mass  because  they 
knew  well  that  it  is  money  that  is  the  “wherewithal”  by  which  motion  is 
imparted  to  these  great  principles,  and  they  substituted,  for  the  brutal  methods 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  methods  more  refined  and  not  less  effective — one 
of  the  simpler  of  these  being  to  threaten  their  opponents  with  the  cost  of  a new 
election.  The  doctrinaire  constitutions  of  the  Continent  saw  only  the  one  side 
of  the  fact  democracy.  Here,  where  there  was  no  constitution,  but  men  were  in 
“condition,”  it  was  seen  as  a whole. 

A vague  feeling  of  all  this  was  never  quite  lost  on  the  Continent.  For  the 
absolute  State  of  the  Baroque  there  had  been  a perfectly  clear  form,  but  for 
“ constitutional  monarchy”  there  were  only  unsteady  compromises,  and  Con- 
servative and  Liberal  parties  were  distinguished  — ■ not,  as  in  England  after 
Canning,  by  the  possession  of  different  but  well-tested  modes  of  government, 
applied  turn-and-turn-about  to  the  actual  work  of  governing  — but  according 
to  the  direction  in  which  they  respectively  desired  to  alter  the  constitution  — 
namely,  towards  tradition  or  towards  theory.  Should  the  Parliament  serve  the 
Dynasty,  or  vice  versa?  — that  was  the  bone  of  contention,  and  in  disputing 
over  it  it  was  forgotten  th^t  foreign  policy  was  the  final  aim.  The  “ Spanish” 
and  the  misnamed  “English”  sides  of  a constitution  would  not  and  could  not 
grow  together,  and  thus  it  befell  that  during  the  nineteenth  century  the  diplo- 
^ Early,  that  is,  in  the  post-rcvolutionary  era  here  considered.  — Tr. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  415 

matic  service  outwards  and  the  Parliamentary  activity  inwards  developed  in 
two  divergent  directions.  Each  became  in  fundamental  feeling  alien  to,  and 
contemptuous  of,  the  other.  Life  fretted  itself  to  soreness  in  a form  that  it 
had  not  developed  out  of  itself.  After  Thermidor,  France  succumbed  to  the 
rule  of  the  Bourse,  mitigated  from  time  to  time  by  the  setting  up  of  a military 
dictature  (1800,  1851,  1871,  1918).  Bismarck’s  creation  was  in  fundamentals 
of  a dynastic  nature,  with  a parliamentary  component  of  decidedly  subordinate 
importance,  and  in  it  the  inner  friction  was  so  strong  as  to  monopolize  the 
available  political  energy,  and  finally,  after  1916,  to  exhaust  the  organism 
itself.  The  Army  had  its  own  history,  with  a great  tradition  going  back  to 
Frederick  William  I,^  and  so  also  had  the  administration.  In  them  was  the 
source  of  Socialism  as  one  kind  of  true  political  “training,”  diametrically 
opposed  to  the  English^  but,  like  it,  a full  expression  of  strong  race-quality. 
The  ofiBcer  and  the  official  were  trained  high.  But  the  necessity  of  breeding  up 
a corresponding  political  type  was  not  recognized.  Higher  policy  was  handled 
“administratively”  and  minor  policy  was  hopeless  squabbling.  And  so  army 
and  administration  finally  became  aims  in  themselves,  after  Bismarck’s  dis- 
appearance had  removed  the  one  man  who  even  without  a supply  of  real  poli- 
ticians to  back  him  (this  tradition  alone  could  have  produced)  was  big  enough 
to  treat  both  as  tools  of  policy  . When  the  issue  of  the  World  War  removed  the 
upper  layers,  nothing  remained  but  parties  educated  for  opposition  only,  and 
these  brought  the  activity  of  Government  down  to  a level  hitherto  unknown 
in  any  Civilization. 

But  to-day  Parliamentarism  is  in  full  decay.  It  was  a continuation  of  the 
Bourgeois  Revolution  by  other  means ^ the  revolution  of  the  Third  Estate  of  1789 
brought  into  legal  form  and  joined  with  its  opponent  the  Dynasty  as  one 
governmental  unit.  Every  modern  election,  in  fact,  is  a civil  war  carried  on  by 
ballot-box  and  every  sort  of  spoken  and  written  stimulus,  and  every  great 
party-leader  is  a sort  of  Napoleon.  In  this  form,  meant  to  remain  infinitely 
valid,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  Western  Culture  and  would  be  nonsensical  and 
impossible  in  any  other,  we  discern  once  more  our  characteristic  tendency  to 
infinity,  historical  foresight  ® and  forethought,  and  will  to  order  the  distant  future, 
in  this  case  according  to  bourgeois  standards  of  the  present. 

All  the  same,  Parliamentarism  is  not  a summit  as  the  absolute  Polis  and  the 
Baroque  State  were  summits,  but  a brief  transition  — namely,  between  the 

^ The  reassertion  of  this  tradition  after  the  emergency-army  of  the  Wars  of  Liberation  (i 812.-1 5) 
had  dispersed  into  the  body  of  the  community  is  a remarkable  story,  in  which  military  and  political 
standpoints  cannot  be  separated.  See  Vidal  de  la  Blache,  Regemration  de  V Armee  Prusse 

Ch.  vi.  — Tr. 

^ See  PreussentummdSoi^ialismuSyp^.  jj^OjCtscq, 

® The  genesis  of  the  Roman  Tribunate  was  a blind  incident,  the  happy"  consequences  of  which 
no  one  really  foresaw.  Western  Constitutions,  on  the  contrary,  have  been  thoroughly  thought  out 
and  their  effects  precisely  calculated  — whether  the  calculation  proved  to  be  correct  or  incorrect, 
the  care  is  undeniable- 


4i6  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

Late-Gulture  period  with  its  mature  forms  and  the  age  of  great  individuals  in  a 
formless  world.  It  contains,  like  the  houses  and  furniture  of  the  first  half  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  a residue  of  good  Baroque.  The  parliamentary  habit  is 
English  Rococo  — but,  no  longer  un-self-conscious  and  in  the  blood,  but 
superficial-initiative  and  at  the  mercy  of  goodwill.  Only  in  the  brief  periods 
of  first  enthusiasms  has  it  an  appearance  of  depth  and  duration,  and  then  only 
because  in  the  flush  of  victory  respect  for  one’s  newly-won  status  makes  it 
incumbent  to  adopt  the  high  manners  of  the  defeated  class.  To  preserve  the 
form,  even  when  it  contradicts  the  advantage,  is  the  convention  which  makes 
parliamentarism  But  when  this  convention  comes  to  be  fully  observed, 

the  very  fact  that  it  is  so  means  that  the  essence  of  parliamentarism  has  already  been 
evaporated.  The  Non-Estate  falls  apart  again  into  its  natural  interest-groups, 
and  the  passion  of  stubborn  and  victorious  defence  is  over.  And  as  soon  as  the 
form  ceases  to  possess  the  attractiveness  of  a young  ideal  that  will  summon  men 
to  the  barricades,  unparliamentary  methods  of  attaining  an  object  without 
(and  even  in  spite  of)  the  ballot-box  will  make  their  appearance  — such  as 
money,  economic  pressure,  and,  above  all,  the  strike.  Neither  the  megalo- 
politan  masses  nor  the  strong  individuals  have  any  real  respect  for  this  form 
without  depth  or  past,  and  when  the  discovery  is  made  that  it  is  only  a form, 
it  has  already  become  a mark  and  shadow.  With  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth 
century  Parliamentarism  (even  English)  is  tending  rapidly  towards  taking  up 
itself  the  r6le  that  it  once  assigned  to  the  kingship.  It  is  becoming  an  impres- 
sive spectacle  for  the  multitude  of  the  Orthodox,  while  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
big  policy,  already  de  jure  transferred  from  the  Crown  to  the  people’s  representa- 
tives, is  passing  de  facto  from  the  latter  to  unofficial  groups  and  the  will  of 
unofficial  personages.  The  World  War  almost  completed  this  development. 
There  is  no  way  back  to  the  old  parliamentarism  from  the  domination  of  Lloyd 
George  and  the  Napoleonism  of  the  French  militarists.  And  for  America, 
hitherto  lying  apart  and  self-contained,  rather  a region  than  a State,  the  paral- 
lelism of  President  and  Congress  which  she  derived  from  a theory  of  Montes- 
quieu has,  with  her  entry  into  world  politics,  become  untenable,  and  must  in 
times  of  real  danger  make  way  for  formless  powers  such  as  those  with  which 
Mexico  and  South  America  have  long  been  familiar. 

vm 

With  this  enters  the  age  of  gigantic  conflicts,  in  which  we  find  ourselves 
to-day.  It  is  the  transition  from  Napoleonism  to  Casarism,  a general  phase  of 
evolution,  which  occupies  at  least  two  centuries  and  can  be  shown  to  exist  in 
all  the  Cultures.  The  Chinese  call  it  Shan-Kwo,  the  “ period  of  the  Contending 
States”  (480-1.30,  corresponding  to  the  Classical  300-50.^  At  the  beginning 

^ From  the  few  European  works  that  concern  themselves  with  questions  of  ancient  Chinese 
history,  it  emerges  that  Chinese  literature  contains  a very  great  amount  of  material  beating  on  this 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  417 

are  reckoned  seven  great  powers,  which,  first  planlessly,  but  later  with  clearer 
and  clearer  purpose,  tend  to  the  inevitable  final  result  of  this  close  succession 
of  vast  wars  and  revolutions.  A century  later  there  are  still  five.  In  441  the 
ruler  of  the  Chou  dynasty  became  a state-pensioner  of  the  ‘‘Eastern  Duke/’ 
and  the  remains  of  territory  that  he  possessed  ceased  accordingly  to  figure  in 
later  history.  Simultaneously  began  in  the  unphilosophical  north-west  ^ 
the  swift  rise  of  the  “Roman”  state  of  Tsin,  which  extended  its  influence  west- 
ward and  southward  over  Tibet  and  Yunnan  and  enclosed  the  other  states  in  a 
great  arc.  The  focus  of  the  opposition  was  in  the  kingdom  of  Tsu  in  the  Taoist 
south,^  whence  the  Chinese  Civilization  pressed  slowly  outwards  into  the  still 
little-known  lands  south  of  the  great  river.  Here  we  have  in  fact  the  opposition 
of  Rome  and  the  Hellenistic  — on  the  one  side,  hard,  clear  will-to-power; 
on  the  other,  the  tendency  to  dreaming  and  world-improvement.  In  368-3x0 
(corresponding  to  the  Second  Punic  War)  the  contest  intensified  itself  into  an 
uninterrupted  struggle  of  the  whole  Chinese  world,  fought  with  mass  armies, 
for  which  the  population  was  strained  to  the  extreme  limit.  “ The  allies,  whose 
lands  were  ten  times  as  great  as  those  of  Tsin,  in  vain  rolled  up  a million  men  — 
Tsin  had  ever  reserves  in  hand  still.  From  first  to  last  a million  men  fell,” 
writes  Sze-ma-tsien.  Su-tsin,  who  began  by  being  Chancellor  of  Tsin,  but  later 
became  a supporter  of  the  League  of  Nations  (Jooh-tsm^  idea  and  went  over  to 
the  Opposition,  worked  up  two  great  coalitions  (333  and  311),  which,  however, 
collapsed  from  inward  disunity  at  the  first  battles.  His  great  adversary,  the 
Chancellor  Chang-I,  resolutely  Imperialist,  was  in  311  on  the  point  of  bringing 
the  Chinese  world  to  voluntary  subjection  when  a change  of  occupancy  of  the 
throne  caused  his  combination  to  miscarry.  In  194  began  the  campaigns  of 
Pe-Ki.®  It  was  in  the  prestige  of  his  victories  that  the  King  of  Tsin  took  the 
mystic  Emperor-title  of  the  legendary  age,^  which  openly  expressed  the  claim 
to  world-rule,  and  was  at  once  imitated  by  the  ruler  of  Tsi  in  the  cast.®  With 
this  began  the  second  maximum  phase  of  the  decisive  struggles.  The  number 

period,  which  corresponds  in  innumerable  parallels  to  our  own  present  time.  But  there  is  a total 
lack  of  any  political  treatment  of  it  that  can  be  taken  seriously.  References:  Hubottcr,  Aus  den 
Flanen  der  Kampfenden  Keiche  (i9ix);  Pi  ton,  “The  Six  Great  Chancellors  of  Tsin,“  China  Review  ^ XIII, 
zox,  X55,  365,  XIV,  3;  Ed.  Chavannes,  Mem.  hist,  de  Se-ma-tsien  (i.%%  and  following);  Pfizmair, 
■Sitt*  Wien  XLIII  (1863)  (“Tsin"),  XLIV  (“Tsu”);  A.  Tschepc,  Histoire  du  royaume  dt  Ou 

(1896),  and (1903). 

^ Corresponding  more  or  less  to  the  province  of  Shemsi. 

® On  the  middle  Yang-tse-kiang. 

2 Biography  13  of  Sze-ma-tsien.  So  far  as  the  translated  evidences  allow  us  to  judge,  the  prepara- 
tion and  dispositions  of  these  campaigns,  the  boldness  of  the  operations  by  which  he  drove  the  enemy 
on  to  ground  where  he  could  beat  him,  and  the  novel  tactical  execution  of  the  separate  battles, 
stamp  Pe-Ki  as  one  of  the  greatest  military  geniuses  of  all  time,  a figure  worthy  indeed  of  adequate 
treatment  by  a military  expert.  It  is  from  this  period  that  we  have  the  authoritative  work  of 
Sun-tse  on  War : Giles,  Sm-Tse  on  the  Aft  of  War  (1910).  [Or  Capt.  E.  R.  Calthrop,  The  Book  of  War — 
Sun  and  Wn  (1^0%'). — Tr.] 

^ See  pp.  31Z,  et  scq. 

® Now  approximately  Shan-tung  and  Pe-chi-li. 


4i8  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

of  independent  states  grew  steadily  less.  In  155  even  the  home  state  of  Con- 
fucius, Lu,  vanished,  and  in  Z4^  the  Chou  dynasty  came  to  an  end.  In  ^46  the 
mighty  Wang-Cheng  became,  at  the  age  of  thirteen.  Emperor  of  Tsin,  and  in 
141,  with  the  aid  of  his  Chancellor  Lui-Shi  (the  Chinese  M^cenas  he  fought 
out  to  victory  the  last  bout  that  the  last  opponent,  the  Empire  of  Tsu,  ventured 
to  challenge.  In  xxi,  sole  ruler  in  actual  fact,  he  assumed  the  title  Shi  (Augus- 
tus). This  is  the  beginning  of  the  Imperial  age  in  China. 

No  era  confronts  its  mankind  so  distinctly  with  the  alternative  of  great  form 
or  great  individual  powers  as  this  “Period  of  the  Contending  States.’*  In  the  de- 
gree in  which  the  nations  cease  to  be  politically  in  “condition,”  in  that  degree 
possibilities  open  up  for  the  energetic  private  person  who  means  to  be  politically 
creative,  who  will  have  power  at  any  price,  and  who  as  a phenomenon  of  force 
becomes  the  Destiny  of  an  entire  people  or  Culture.  Events  have  become 
unpredictable  on  the  basis  of  form.  Instead  of  the  given  tradition  that  can 
dispense  with  genius  (because  it  is  itself  cosmic  force  at  highest  capacity),  we 
have  now  the  accident  of  great  fact-men.  The  accident  of  their  rise  brings  a 
weak  people  (for  example,  the  Macedonians),  to  the  peak  of  events  overnight, 
and  the  accident  of  their  death  (for  example,  Caesar’s)  can  immediately  plunge 
a world  from  personally  secured  order  into  chaos. 

This  indeed  had  been  manifested  earlier  in  critical  times  of  transition.  The 
epoch  of  the  Fronde,  the  Ming-shu,  the  First  Tyrannis,  when  men  were  not  in 
form,  but  fought  about  form,  has  always  thrown  up  a number  of  great  figures 
who  grew  too  big  for  definition  and  limitation  in  terms  of  office.  The  change 
from  Culture  to  Civili2:ation,  with  its  typical  Napoleonism,  does  so  too.  But 
with  this,  which  is  the  preface  to  unredeemed  historical  formlessness,  dawns 
the  real  day  of  the  great  individual.  For  us  this  period  attained  almost  to  its 
climax  in  the  World  War;  in  the  Classical  World  it  began  with  Hannibal, 
who  challenged  Rome  in  the  name  of  Hellenism  (to  which  inwardly  he  be- 
longed), but  went  under  because  the  Hellenistic  East,  in  true  Classical  fashion, 
apprehended  the  meaning  of  the  hour  too  late,  or  not  at  all.  With  his  downfall 
began  that  proud  sequence  that  runs  from  the  Scipios  through  iEmilius  Paullus, 
Flamininus,  the  Catos,  the  Gracchi,  Marius,  and  Sulla  to  Pompey,  Cassar,  and 
Augustus.  In  China,  correspondingly,  during  the  period  of  the  “Contending 
States,”  a like  chain  of  statesmen  and  generals  centred  on  Tsin  as  the  Classical 
figures  centred  on  Rome.  In  accordance  with  the  complete  want  of  understand- 
ing of  the  political  side  of  Chinese  history  that  prevails,  these  men  are  usually 
described  as  Sophists.^  They  were  so,  but  only  in  the  same  sense  as  leading 

^ Piton  “Ln-puh-Weih,”  Ckina  XIIL  pp.  365  ct  scq. 

® Even  if  the  Chinese  authors  themselves  misunderstood  the  expression  in  the  same,  or  any- 
thing like  the  same,  way  as  their  Western  translators,  the  fact  would  only  prove  that  the  appreci- 
ation of  political  problems  vanished  as  rapidly  In  the  Chinese  Imperial  Age  as  in  fact  it  did  in  the 
Roman  because  they  were  no  longer  personally  and  li vingly  experienced.  The  much-admired 
Sze-ma-tsien  is  after  all  a compiler  of  the  same  rank  as  Plutarch  (with  whom  he  corresponds  in 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  419 

Romans  of  the  same  period  were  Stoics  — that  is,  as  having  been  educated  in 
the  philosophy  and  rhetoric  of  the  Greek  East.  All  were  finished  orators  and 
ail  from  time  to  time  wrote  on  philosophy,  Cxsar  and  Brutus  no  less  than 
Gato  and  Cicero,  but  they  did  so  not  as  professional  philosophers,  but  because 
otium  mm  dignitaU  was  the  habit  of  cultivated  gentlemen.  In  business  hours 
they  were  masters  of  fact,  whether  on  battle-field  or  in  high  politics,  and  pre- 
cisely the  same  is  true  of  the  Chancellors  Chang-I  and  Su-tsin;  ^ the  dreaded 
diplomatist  Fan-Sui  who  overthrew  Pe-Ki,  the  general;  Wei-Yang  the  legislator 
of  Tsin;  Lui-Shi,  the  first  Emperor’s  Msecenas,  and  others. 

The  Culture  had  bound  up  all  its  forces  in  strict  form.  Now  they  were 
released,  and  “Nature”  — that  is,  the  cosmic  — broke  forth  immediate. 
The  change  from  the  absolute  State  to  the  battling  Society  of  nations  that 
marks  the  beginning  of  every  Civilization  may  mean  for  idealists  and  ideologues 
what  they  like  — in  the  world  of  facts  it  means  the  transition  from  government 
in  the  style  and  pulse  of  a strict  tradition  to  the  sk  voU,  sic  jubeo  of  the  unbridled 
personal  regime.  The  maximum  of  symbolic  and  j'^;f^f-personal  form  coincides 
with  that  of  the  Late  period  of  the  Culture  — in  China  about  600,  in  the  Clas- 
sical about  450,  for  ourselves  about  1700.  The  minimum  in  the  Classical  lies  in 
the  time  of  Sulla  and  Pompey,  and  for  us  will  be  reached  (and  possibly  passed) 
in  the  next  hundred  years.  Great  interstate  and  internal  conflicts,  revolutions 
of  a fearful  kind,  interpenetrate  increasingly,  but  the  questions  at  issue  in  all 
of  them  without  exception  are  (consciously  and  frankly  or  not)  questions  of 
unofficial,  and  eventually  purely  personal,  power.  It  is  historically  of  no 
importance  what  they  themselves  aimed  at  theoretically,  and  we  need  not  know 
the  catchwords  under  which  the  Chinese  and  Arabian  revolutions  of  this  stage 
broke  out,  nor  even  whether  there  were  such  catchwords.  None  of  the  innumer- 
able revolutions  of  this  era  — which  more  and  more  become  blind  outbreaks  of 
uprooted  megalopolitan  masses  — has  ever  attained,  or  ever  had  the  possibility 
of  attaining,  an  aim.  What  stands  is  only  the  historical  fact  of  an  accelerated 
demolition  of  ancient  forms  that  leaves  the  path  clear  for  Gassarism. 

But  the  same  is  true  also  of  the  wars,  in  which  the  armies  and  their  tactical 

date  also).  The  high  point  of  historical  comprehension,  which  presumes  an  equivalent  experience  in  life^ 
must  for  China  have  lain  in  the  period  of  the  Contending  States,  as  it  lies  for  us  in  the  nincteench 
century  and  after. 

^ Both,  like  most  of  the  leading  statesmen  of  the  time,  were  pupils  of  Kwei-ku-tsc,  whose 
knowledge  of  men,  deep  sense  of  the  historically  possible,  and  command  of  the  diplomatic  technique 
of  the  age  (the  “Art  of  the  vertical  and  the  horizontal”)  must  have  made  him  one  of  the  most  in- 
fluential personalities  of  the  period.  Another  figure  of  the  same  sort  of  weight  after  him  was  the 
thinker  and  war-theorist  above  alluded  to,  Sun-tsc,  who  amongst  others  was  the  tutor  of  the  Chancel- 
lor Lui-Si. 

[Sun-Tsc’s  book  of  war,  as  presented  in  Calthrop*s  translation,  is  comparable  to  nothing  in  West- 
ern military  literature  short  of  Clausewitz's  Vom  Kriege.  Clausewitz  was  a contemporary  and  product 
of  the  Napoleonic  epoch,  and  the  glow  of  Romanticism  has  not  yet  passed  from  him;  Sun,  on  the 
other  hand,  came  “later,”  and  his  atmosphere  is  the  shrewd  factual  atmosphere  of  pre-Gaesarism.  — 


410  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

methods  become  more  and  more  the  creation,  not  of  the  epoch,  but  ^of  iin- 
controlled  individual  captains,  who  in  many  cases  discovered  their  genius  very 
late  and  by  accident.  While  in  300  there  were  Roman  armies,  in  100  there  were 
the  armies  of  Marius  and  Sulla  and  Caesar;  and  Octavian's  army,  which  was 
composed  of  Caesar’s  veterans,  led  its  general  much  more  than  it  was  led  by 
him.  But  with  this  the  methods  of  war,  its  means,  and  its  aims  assumed  raw- 
natural  and  ferocious  forms,^  very  different  from  those  prevailing  before.  Their 
duels  were  not  eighteenth-century  Trianon  duels,  encounters  in  knightly  forms 
with  fixed  rules  to  determine  when  a man  might  declare  himself  exhausted, 
what  maximum  of  force  might  be  employed,  and  what  conditions  the  chivalry 
permitted  a victor  to  impose.  They  were  ring-battles  of  infuriated  men  with 
fists  and  teeth,  fought  to  the  bodily  collapse  of  one  and  exploited  without 
reserve  or  restraint  by  the  victor.  The  first  great  example  of  this  ‘‘return  to 
Nature”  is  afforded  by  the  French  Revolutionary  and  Napoleonic  armies,  which, 
instead  of  artificial  manoeuvres  with  small  bodies,  practised  the  mass-onset 
without  regard  to  losses  and  thereby  shattered  to  atoms  the  refined  strategy  of 
the  Rococo.  To  bring  the  whole  muscular  force  of  a nation  on  to  the  battle- 
fields by  the  universal-service  system  was  an  idea  utterly  alien  to  the  age  of 
Frederick  the  Great.^ 

Similarly,  in  every  Culture,  the  technique  of  war  hesitatingly  followed  the 
advance  of  craftsmanship,  until  at  the  beginning  of  the  Civilization  it  suddenly 
takes  the  lead,  presses  all  mechanical  possibilities  of  the  time  relentlessly  into 
its  service,  and  under  pressure  of  military  necessity  even  opens  up  new  domains 
hitherto  unexploited  — but  at  the  same  time  renders  largely  ineffectual  the 
personal  heroism  of  the  thoroughbred,  the  ethos  of  the  noble,  and  the  subtle 
intellect  of  the  Late  Culture.  In  the  Classical  world,  where  the  Polls  made 
mass-armies  essentially  impossible  — for  relatively  to  the  general  smallness  of 
Classical  forms,  tactical  included,  the  numbers  of  Cannm,  Philippi,  and  Actium 
were  enormous  and  exceptional  — the  second  Tyrannis  (Dionysius  of  Syracuse 
leading)  introduced  mechanical  technique  into  warfare,  and  on  a large  scale.® 

^ A story  is  told  of  Sun,  that  when  for  a jest  (or  a demonstration  of  tactics)  opposed  forces  were 
made  up  from  the  court  ladies,  one  of  the  commanders,  the  sovereign’s  favourite  wife,  was  executed 
by  Sun’s  command  for  disobeying  an  order.  — - Tf. 

2 Frederick’s  “conscripts”  (Landeskinder^  wctc  a long-service  element,  small  in  proportion  to  the 
population,  and  of  serf  status.  Only  the  relative  poverty  of  Prussia  compelled  this  much  of  departure 
from  the  then  normal  procedure  of  recruiting  volunteers,  to  which  the  Prussian  army  reverted  as  soon 
as  its  treasury  could  afford  to  do  so.  Maurice  de  Saxe  is  the  one  outstanding  soldier  of  the  period  who 
advocated  universal  citizen  service.  But  the  famous  * * Kheries  ’ ’ were  written  (‘  ‘ in  thirteen  sleepless 
nights  ”)  in  i73x,  before  he  had  held  high  command.  The  military  works  of  Leibniz  touch  upon  the 
subject,  but  he  was  a practical  man  as  well  as  a philosopher,  and  his  detailed  proposals  are  in  the  spirit 
of  the  time.  On  the  contrary,  the  pure  philosopher  Spinoza  definitely  advocated  universal  service,  — - 
Tr.  . ■■  ■ ■ ■ . • • • . ■ ■ ■ 

® Large,  that  is,  relatively  to  the  general  development  of  Classical  technics  in  other  fields, 
which  was  of  the  slightest  — not  in  any  way  outstanding  if  judged  by,  say,  Assyrian  or  Egyptian 
standards. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  42.1 

Then  for  the  first  time  it  became  possible  to  carry  out  sieges  like  those  of  Rhodes 
(305)9  Syracuse  (zi3),  Carthage  (146),  and  Aiesia  (51)9  in  which  also  the 
increasing  importance  of  rapidity,  even  for  Classical  strategy,  became  evident. 
It  was  in  line  with  this  tendency  that  the  Roman  legion,  the  characteristic 
structure  of  which  developed  only  in  the  Hellenistic  age,  worked  like  a machine 
as  compared  with  the  Athenian  and  Spartan  militias  of  the  fifth  century.  In 
China,  correspondingly,  iron  was  worked  up  for  cutting  and  thrusting  weapons 
from  474,  light  cavalry  of  the  Mongolian  model  displaced  the  heavy  war- 
chariot,  and  fortress  warfare  suddenly  acquired  outstanding  importance.^ 
The  fundamental  craving  of  Civili^zed  mankind  for  speed,  mobility,  and  mass- 
effects  finally  combined,  in  the  world  of  Europe  and  America,  with  the  Faustian 
will  to  domination  over  Nature  and  produced  dynamic  methods  of  war  that 
even  to  Frederick  the  Great  would  have  seemed  like  lunacy,  but  to  us  of  to-day, 
in  close  proximity  to  our  technics  of  transportation  and  industry,  are  perfectly 
natural.  Napoleon  horsed  his  artillery  and  thereby  made  it  highly  mobile 
(just  as  he  broke  up  the  mass  army  of  the  Revolution  into  a system  of  self- 
contained  and  easily  moved  corps),  and  already  at  Wagram  and  Borodino  it  had 
augmented  its  purely  physical  effectiveness  to  the  point  of  what  we  should 
call  rapid-fire  and  drum  fire.^  The  second  stage  is  — most  significantly  — 
marked  by  the  American  Civil  War  of  1861-5  — which  even  in  the  numbers  of 
troops  it  involved  far  surpassed  the  order  of  magnitude  of  the  Napoleonic 
Wars  ^ and  in  which  for  the  first  time  the  railway  was  used  for  large  troop- 
movements,  the  telegraph-network  for  messages,  and  a steam  fleet,  keeping  the 
sea  for  months  on  end,  for  blockade,  and  in  which  armoured  ships,  the  torpedo, 
rifled  weapons,  and  monster  artillery  of  extraordinary  range  were  discovered.^*  ^ 
The  third  stage  is  that  of  the  World  War,  preluded  by  the  Russo-Japanese  con- 
flict; ® here  submarine  and  aircraft  were  set  to  work,  speed  of  invention  became 

^ The  book  of  the  Socialist  Moh-ti,  of  this  period,  treats  of  universal  love  of  mankind  in  its 
jErst  part,  of  fortress  artillery  in  its  second  — a singular  example  of  contraposition  of  truths  and  facts. 
Forke  in  Vni  (Hirth  number). 

^ A whole  literature  exists  for  Napoleon’s  “case-shot  attack,”  which  was  closely  studied  in  the 
years  before  1914  with  the  definite  aim  of  finding  a key  to  victories  that  the  mechanical  developments 
in  the  defensive  rifle  had  made  doubtful.  — Tr. 

2 On  the  side  of  the  North,  more  than  i J million  men  out  of  barely  zo  million  inhabitants. 

[The  total  of  men  of  military  age  in  the  North  was  4,600,000,  of  whom  ^, 780, 000  actually  en- 
listed. The  figure  of  1,700,000  is  a reduction  to  a three-year  level  — i.e.,  men  who  served  through- 
out the  war  counting  as  i|  each  and  men  who  served  for  one  year  as  | each.  The  Southern  states 
put  into  the  field,  on  the  same  three-years’  basis,  900,000  out  of  1,065,000  men  of  military  age. 
(DodgCy  Birds  Eye  View  of  our  CivU  War,')  — Tr.] 

^ To  which  should  be  added,  though  on  a small  scale,  the  first  serious  attempts  at  submarines, 
machine-guns,  and  magaizine  rifles.  — Tr. 

® Amongst  the  wholly  new  problems  was  that  of  rapidly  restoring  railways  and  bridges;  the 
bridge  at  Chattanooga,  for  the  heaviest  military  trains,  2.40  metres  long  and  30  metres  high,  was  built 
in  4I  days. 

® Modern  Japan  belongs  to  the  Western  Civilization  no  less  than  “modern”  Carthage  of  the 
third  century  to  the  Classical. 


42.1  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

a new  arm  in  itself,  and  the  extent  (though  most  certainly  not  the  intensity) 
of  the  means  used  attained  a maximum.  But  to  this  expenditure  of  force  there 
corresponds  everywhere  the  ruthlessness  of  the  decisions.  At  the  very  outset 
of  the  Chinese  Shan-Kwo  period  we  find  the  utter  annihilation  of  the  State  of 
Wu  — an  act  which  in  the  preceding  Chun-tsiu  period  chivalry  would  have 
made  impossible.  Even  in  the  peace  of  Campo  Formic  Napoleon  outraged  the 
convenances  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  after  Austerlitz  he  introduced  the 
practice  of  exploiting  military  success  without  regard  to  any  but  material 
restrictions.  The  last  step  still  possible  is  being  taken  in  the  peace  treaty  of  the 
Versailles  type,  which  deliberately  avoids  finality  and  settlement,  and  keeps 
open  the  possibility  of  setting  up  new  conditions  at  every  change  in  the  situ- 
ation- The  same  evolution  is  seen  in  the  chain  of  the  three  Punic  Wars.  The 
idea  of  wiping  out  one  of  the  leading  great  powers  of  the  world  — which 
eventually  became  familiar  to  everyone  through  Cato's  deliberately  dry  in- 
sistence on  his  '^Ceterum  censeo  Carthaginem  esse  delendam'*  — never  crossed  the 
mind  of  the  victor  of  Zama  and,  for  ail  the  wild  war-ethics  of  the  Classical 
Poleis,  it  would  have  seemed  to  Lysander,  as  he  stood  victorious  in  Athens,  an 
impiety  towards  every  god. 

The  Period  of  the  Contending  States  begins  for  the  Classical  world  with  the 
battle  of  Ipsus  C301)  which  established  the  trinity  of  Eastern  great  powers, 
and  the  Roman  victory  over  the  Etruscans  and  Samnites  at  Sentinum  (2.95), 
which  created  a mid-Italian  great  power  by  the  side  of  Carthage.  Then,  however, 
the  characteristic  Classical  preference  for  things  near  and  in  the  present  resulted 
in  eyes'  being  shut  while  Rome  won,  first  the  Italian  south  in  the  Pyrrhic  ad- 
venture, then  the  sea  in  the  first  Punic  War,  and  then  the  Celtic  north  through 
C.  Flaminius.  The  significance  even  of  Hannibal  (probably  the  only  man  of  his 
time  who  clearly  saw  the  trend  of  events)  was  ignored  by  all,  the  Romans 
themselves  not  excepted.  It  was  at  Zama^  and  not  merely  later  at  Magnesia 
and  Pydna,  that  the  Hellenistic  Eastern  powers  were  defeated.  All  in  vain  the 
great  Scipio,  truly  anxious  in  the  presence  of  the  destiny  to  which  a Polis 
overloaded  with  the  tasks  of  a world-dominion  was  marching,  sought 
thereafter  to  avoid  all  conquest.  In  vain  his  entourage  forced  through  the 
Macedonian  War,  against  the  will  of  every  party,  merely  in  order  that  the 
East  could  thenceforth  be  ignored  as  harmless.  Imperialism  is  so  necessary  a 
product  of  any  Civilization  that  when  a people  refuses  to  assume  the  rdle  of 
master,  it  is  seized  and  pushed  into  it.  The  Roman  Empire  was  conquered 
— the  **  orbis  termrum*  condensed  itself  into  that  form  and  forced  the  Romans 
to  give  it  their  name.  It  is  all  very  Classical.  While  the  Chinese  states  de- 
fended even  the  mere  remnants  of  their  independence  with  the  last  bitterness, 
Rome  after  146  only  took  upon  herself  to  transform  the  Eastern  land-masses  into 
provinces  because  there  was  no  other  resource  against  anarchy  left.  And  even 
this  much  resulted  in  the  inward  form  of  Rome  — the  last  which  had  remained 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  4x3 

uptight  — melting  in  the  Gtacchan  disorders.  And  (what  is  unparalleled 
elsewhere)  it  was  not  between  states  that  the  final  rounds  of  the  battle  for 
Imperium  were  fought,  but  between  the  parties  of  a city  — the  form  of  the 
Polis  allowed  of  no  other  outcome.  Of  old  it  had  been  Sparta  Athens, 
now  it  was  Optimate  persm 'PopnlsLr  Party.  In  the  Gracchan  revolution,  which 
was  already  (134)  heralded  by  a first  Servile  War,  the  younger  Scipio  was 
secretly  murdered  and  C.  Gracchus  openly  slain  — the  first  who  as  Princeps 
and  the  first  who  as  Tribune  were  political  centres  in  themselves  amidst  a 
world  become  formless.  When,  in  104,  the  urban  masses  of  Rome  for  the  first 
time  lawlessly  and  tumultuously  invested  a private  person,  Marius,  with  Im- 
perium, the  deeper  importance  of  the  drama  then  enacted  is  comparable  with 
that  of  the  assumption  of  the  mythic  Emperor-title  by  the  ruler  of  Tsin  in  z88. 
The  inevitable  product  of  the  age,  Caesarism,  suddenly  outlines  itself  on  the 
horizon. 

The  heir  of  the  Tribune  was  Marius,  who  like  him  linked  mob  and  high 
finance  and  in  87  murdered  off  the  old  aristocracy  in  masses.  The  heir  of  the 
Princeps  was  Sulla,  who  in  8z  annihilated  the  class  of  the  great  merchants  by 
his  proscriptions.  Thereafter  the  final  decisions  press  on  rapidly,  as  in  China 
after  the  emergence  of  Wang  Cheng.  Pompey  the  Princeps  and  Cassar  the 
Tribune  — tribune  not  in  office,  but  in  attitude  — were  still  party-leaders, 
but  nevertheless,  already  at  Lucca,  they  were  arranging  with  Crassus  and  each 
other  for  the  first  partition  of  the  world  amongst  themselves.  When  the  heirs 
of  Cassar  fought  his  murderers  at  Philippi,  both  had  ceased  to  be  more  than 
groups.  By  Actium  the  issue  was  between  individuals,  and  Ca^sarism  will  out, 
even  in  such  a process  as  this. 

In  the  corresponding  evolution  within  the  Arabian  world  it  is,  of  course, 
the  Magian  Consensus  that  takes  the  place  of  the  bodily  Polis  as  the  basic 
form  in  and  through  which  the  facts  accomplish  themselves;  and  this  form, 
as  we  have  seen,  excluded  any  separation  of  political  and  religious  tendencies 
to  such  an  extent  that  even  the  urban  bourgeois  urge  towards  freedom  (marking, 
here  as  elsewhere,  the  beginning  of  the  Period  of  Contending  States)  presents 
itself  in  orthodox  disguise,  and  so  has  hitherto  almost  escaped  notice.^  It 
appeared  as  a will  to  break  loose  from  the  Caliphate,  which  the  Sassanids,  and 
Diocletian  following  them,  had  created  in  the  forms  of  the  feudal  state.  From 
the  times  of  Justinian  and  Chosroes  Nushirvan  this  had  had  to  meet  the  onset 
of  Frondeurs  — led  by  the  heads  of  the  Greek  and  Mazdaist  Churches,  the 
nobility,  both  Persian-Mazdaist  (above  all  Irak)  and  Greek  (particularly  the 
Asiatic),  and  the  high  chivalry  of  Armenia,  which  was  divided  into  two  parts 
by  the  difference  of  religion.  The  absolutism  almost  attained  in  the  seventh 

^ For  the  politico-social  history  of  the  Arabian  World  there  is  the  same  lack  of  deep  and  pene- 
trating research  as  for  the  Chinese.  Only  the  political  evolution  of  the  Western  margin  up  to  Diocle- 
tian, regarded  hitherto  as  within  the  Classical  pale,  is  an  exception. 


4Z4  the  decline  of  THE  WEST  - 

century  was  then  suddenly  destroyed  by  the  attack  of  Islam.  In  its  political 
beginnings  Islam  was  strictly  aristocratic;  the  handful  of  Arabian  families  ^ 
who  everywhere  kept  the  leading  in  their  hands,  very  soon  formed  in  the 
conquered  territories  a new  higher  nobility  of  strong  breed  and  immense  self- 
sufBcingness  which  thrust  the  dynasty  down  to  the  same  level  as  its  English 
“contemporaries”  thrust  theirs.  The  Civil  War  between  Othman  and  Ali 
(656-661)  was  the  expression  of  a true  Fronde,  and  its  movements  were  all 
in  the  interests  of  two  clans  and  their  respective  adherents.  The  Islamic  Whigs 
and  Tories  of  the  eighth  century,  like  the  English  of  the  eighteenth,  alone 
practised  high  politics,  and  their  coteries  and  family  quarrels  are  more  im- 
portant to  the  history  of  the  time  than  any  events  in  the  reigning  house  of  the 
Ommaiyads  (661-750). 

But  with  the  fall  of  the  gay  and  enlightened  dynasty  that  had  resided  in 
Damascus  — that  is,  West-Aramasan  and  Monophysite  Syria  — the  natural 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  Arabian  Culture  reappeared;  it  was  the  East-Aram^an 
region.  Once  the  basis  of  Sassanid  and  now  of  Abbassid  power,  but  always  — 
irrespective  of  whether  its  shaping  was  Persian  or  Arabian,  or  its  religion 
Mazdaist,  Nestorian,  or  Islamic  — it  expressed  one  and  the  same  grand  line 
of  development  and  was  the  exemplar  for  Syria  as  for  Byzantium  alike.  From 
Kufa  the  movement  started  which  led  to  the  downfall  of  the  Ommaiyads  and 
their  ancien  regime^  and  the  character  of  this  movement  — • of  which  the  whole 
extent  has  never  to  this  day  been  observed  ^ — was  that  of  a social  revolution  directed 
against  the  primary  orders  of  society  and  the  aristocratic  tradition.'^  It  began  among  the 
Mavali,  the  small  bourgeoisie  in  the  East,  and  directed  itself  with  bitter 
hostility  against  the  Arabs,  not  qua  champions  of  Islam  but  qua  new  nobility. 
The  recently  converted  Mavali,  almost  all  former  Mazdaists,  took  Islam  more 
seriously  than  the  Arabs  themselves,  who  represented  also  a class-ideal.  Even 
in  the  army  of  Ali  the  wholly  democratic  and  Puritan  Qaraites  had  split  off/ 
and  in  their  ranks  we  see  for  the  first  time  the  combination  of  fanatic  sectarianism 
and  Jacobinism.  Here  and  now  there  emerged  not  only  the  Shiite  tendency, 
but  also  the  first  impulses  towards  the  Communistic  Karramiyya  movement, 
which  can  be  traced  to  Mazdak  ^ and  later  produced  the  vast  outbreaks  under 
Babek.  The  Abbassids  were  anything  but  favourites  with  the  insurgents  of 
Kufa,  and  it  was  only  owing  to  their  great  diplomatic  skill  that  they  were 
first  allowed  a footing  as  officers  and  then  — almost  Tike  Napoleon — were 
able  to  enter  into  the  heritage  of  a Revolution  that  had  spread  over  the  whole 

^ It  was  a few  thousands  only  that  accompanied  the  first  conquerors  and  spread  themselves  from 
Tunis  to  Turkestan,  and  these  everywhere  constituted  themselves  a self-contained  and  close  Estate 
in  the  entourage  of  the  new  potentates.  An  **  KtahimVdlhrwandermg'  ' is  out  of  the  question. 

2 J.  Wellhauscn,  Das  arabische  Reich  mdsein  Sfur^  (i90z),  pp.  309,  ct  scq. 

® Compare  the  inner  divisions  of  the  English  Parliamentary  army  in  and  after  the  Civil  Wars. 
— Tr. 

^ Sec  p.  z6i. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  4x5 

East.  After  their  victory  they  built  Baghdad  — a resurrected  Ctesiphon, 
symbol  of  the  downfall  of  feudal  Arabism  — and  this  first  world-city  of  the 
new  Civilisation  became  from  800  to  1050  the  theatre  of  the  events  which  led 
from  Napoleonism  to  Cassarism,  from  the  Calif  hate  to  the  Sultanate  y which,  in 
Baghdad  no  less  than  in  Byzantium,  is  the  Magian  type  of  power  without  form 
— here  also  the  only  kind  of  power  still  possible. 

We  have  to  recognize  quite  clearly,  then,  that  in  the  Arabian  world  as 
elsewhere  democracy  was  a class-ideal  — the  outlook  of  townsmen  and  the 
expression  of  their  will  to  be  free  from  the  old  linkages  with  land,  be  it  a 
desert  or  plough-land.  The  “no'*  which  answered  the  Caliph-tradition  could 
disguise  itself  in  very  numerous  forms,  and  neither  free-thought  nor  constitu- 
tionalism in  our  sense  was  necessary  to  it.  Mjagian  mind  and  Magian  money  are 
*^free**  in  quite  a different  way.  The  Byzantine  monkhood  was  liberal  to  the 
point  of  turbulence,  not  only  against  court  and  nobility,  but  also  against  the 
higher  ecclesiasticai  powers,  which  had  developed  a hierarchy  (corresponding 
to  the  Gothic)  even  before  the  Council  of  Nicara.  The  consensus  of  the  Faithful, 
the  “people"  in  the  most  daring  sense,  was  looked  upon  as  willed  by  God 
(“Nature,"  Rousseau  would  have  said),  as  equal  and  free  from  all  powers  of  the 
blood.  The  celebrated  scene  in  which  the  Abbot  Theodore  of  Studion  adjured 
the  Emperor  Leo  V to  obey  (813)  is  a Storming  of  the  Bastille  in  Magian  forms. ^ 
Not  long  afterwards  there  began  the  revolt  of  the  Paulicians,  very  pious  and  in 
social  matters  wholly  radical,^  who  set  up  a state  of  their  own  beyond  the 
Taurus,  ravaged  all  Asia  Minor,  defeated  one  Imperial  levy  after  another,  and 
were  not  subjugated  till  874.  This  corresponds  in  every  way  to  the  communistic- 
religious  movement  of  the  Karramiyya,  which  extended  from  the  Tigris  to 
Merv  and  whose  leader  Babek  succumbed  only  after  a twenty  years*  struggle 
(817-837);®  and  the  other  like  outbreak  of  the  Carmathians^  in  the  West 
(890-904),  whose  liaisons  reached  from  Arabia  into  all  the  Syrian  cities  and 
who  propagated  rebellion  as  far  as  the  Persian  coast.  But,  besides  these,  there 
were  still  other  disguises  of  the  political  party-battle.  When  now  we  are  told 
that  the  Byzantine  army  was  Iconoclast  and  that  the  military  party  was  conse- 
quently opposed  by  an  Iconodule  monkish  party,  we  begin  to  see  the  passions 
of  the  century  of  the  image-controversy  (740-840)  in  quite  a new  light,  and 
to  understand  that  the  end  of  the  crisis  (843)  — the  final  defeat  of  the  Icono- 
clasts and  simultaneously  of  the  free-church  monkish  policy  — signifies  a Restora- 
tion in  the  1815  sense  of  the  word.®  And,  lastly,  this  period  is  the  time  of  the 

^ K.  Dietcrich,  Bx-  Charakurkopfe,  p.  54:  ‘*Sincc  thou  wilt  have  an  answer  from  us,  receive  it 
then ! Paul  has  said  some  in  the  Church  are  ordained  by  God  to  be  Apostles,  some  prophets,  but  he 
said  nothing  about  Emperors  — we  will  not  follow  though  it  were  an  angel  that  bade  us,*  how  much 
less  if  thou!  ’’ 

^ Cf.  p.  316.  ^ Bji2Ltt,  Gesch.  d,  Araher 

^ See  Ency.  Brit,,  XI  ed.,  art.  **  Carmathians.’*  — Tr. 

^ Krumbacher,  Byx,-  Lit,~Gesch.,  p.  965. 


4z6  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

fearful  slave-rebellion  in  Irak  — the  kernel  of  the  Abbassids’  realm  — which 
throws  sudden  light  upon  a series  of  other  social  upheavals.  Ali,  the  Spartacus 
of  Islam,  founded  in  869,  south  of  Baghdad,  a veritable  Negro  state  out  of  the 
masses  of  runaways,  built  himself  a capital,  Muktara,  and  extended  his  power 
far  in  the  directions  of  Arabia  and  Persia  alike,  where  he  gained  the  support  of 
whole  tribes.  In  871  Basra,  the  first  great  port  of  the  Islamic  world,  inhabited 
by  nearly  a million  souls,  was  taken,  deluged  in  massacre,  and  burnt.  Not  till 
883  was  this  slave-state  destroyed. 

Thus  slowly  the  Sassanid-Byzantine  forms  were  hollowed  out,  and  in  the 
place  of  the  ancient  traditions  of  the  higher  officialdom  and  nobility  there  arose 
the  inconsequent  and  wholly  personal  power  of  incidental  geniuses  — the 
Sultanate,  For  this  is  the  specifically  Arabian  form,  and  it  appears  simultane- 
ously in  Byzantium  and  Baghdad  and  takes  its  steady  course  from  the  Napoleonic 
beginnings  about  800  to  the  completed  Cassarism  of  the  Seljuk  Turks  about 
1050.  This  form  is  purely  Magian,  belongs  only  to  that  Culture,  and  is  in- 
comprehensible without  the  most  fundamental  axioms  of  its  soul.  The  Cali- 
phate, a synthesis  of  political  (not  to  say  cosmic)  beat  and  style,  was  not 
abolished  — • for  the  Caliph  as  the  representative  of  God  recognized  by  the 
Consensus  of  the  elect  is  sacred  — but  he  was  deprived  of  all  powers  that 
Cassarism  needed  to  possess,  just  as  Pompey  and  Augustus  in  fact,  and  Sulla  and 
Csesar  in  fact  and  in  name,  abstracted  these  powers  from  the  old  constitutional 
forms  of  Rome.  In  the  end  there  remained  to  the  Caliph  about  as  much  power 
as  the  Senate  and  the  Comitias  had  under  Tiberius.  The  whole  richness  of 
being  in  high  form  — in  law,  costume,  ethic  — that  had  once  been  a symbol, 
was  now  mere  trappings  covering  a formless  and  purely  factual  regime. 

So  we  find  by  the  side  of  Michael  III  (Sqi-Sby)  Bardas,  and  by  Constan- 
tine VII  (9IX-959)  Romanos  — the  latter  even  formally  Co-Emperor.^  In  867 
the  ex-groom  Basileios,  a Napoleonic  figure,  overthrew  Bardas  and  founded 
the  sword-dynasty  of  the  Armenians  (to  1081),  in  which  generals  instead  of 
Emperors  mostly  ruled  — force-men  like  Romanos,  Nicephorus,  and  Bardas 
Phocas.  The  greatest  amongst  them  was  John  Tzimisces  (969-976)  in  Armenian 
Kiur  Zan.  In  Baghdad  it  was  the  Hurks  w)io  played  the  Armenian  r61e;  in 
84%  the  Caliph  Vathek  invested  one  of  their  leaders  for  the  first  time  with  the 
title  of  Sultan.  From  86z  the  Turkish  praetorians  held  the  ruler  in  tutelage,  and 
in  945  Achmed,  the  founder  of  the  Sultan-dynasty  of  the  Buyids,  formally 
restricted  the  Abbassid  Caliph  to  his  religious  dignities.  And  then  there  set  in, 
in  both  the  world-cities,  an  unrestrained  competition  between  the  mighty 
provincial  families  for  possession  of  the  supreme  power.  In  the  case  of  the 
Christian  we  find,  indeed,  Basileios  II  and  others  challenging  the  great  lati- 
fundia  lords,  but  this  does  not  in  the  least  mean  social  purposes  in  the  Icgis- 

1 For  ail  this  see  Knimbacher,  op,  cit.,  pp.  969--90;  C,  Neumann,  Die  Weltstelluyig  des  Bjz 

Reiches  mr  dm  Kreuzxdien 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  >.7 

lator.  It  was  an  act  of  self-defence  on  the  part  of  the  momentary  potentate 
against  possible  heirs,  and  closely  analogous,  therefore,  to  the  proscriptions  of 
Sulla  and  the  Triumvirs.  Half  Asia  Minor  belonged  to  the  Dukas,  Phocas,  and 
Skleros  connexions;  the  Chancellor  Basileios,  who  could  keep  an  army  on  pay 
out  of  his  own  fabulous  resources,  has  long  ago  been  compared  with  Crassus.^ 
But  the  imperial  age  proper  begins  only  with  the  Seljuk  Turks.^  Their  leader 
Togrulbek  won  Irak  in  1043  Armenia  in  1049,  and  in  1055  forced  the  Caliph 
to  grant  him  the  hereditary  Sultanate.  His  son  Alp  Arslan  conquered  Syria  and, 
by  the  victory  of  Man2:ikert,  gained  eastern  Asia  Minor.  The  remnant  of  the 
Byzantine  Empire  thenceforward  possessed  no  importance  to,  or  influence  on, 
the  further  destinies  of  the  Turkish  Islamic  Imperium. 

This  is  the  phase,  too,  which  in  Egypt  is  concealed  under  the  name  of  the 
**Hyksos.”  Between  the  Xllth  and  the  XVIIIth  Dynasties  lay  two  centuries,^ 
which  began  with  the  collapse  of  the  ancien  regime  which  had  culminated  with 
Sesostris  III,^  and  ended  with  the  beginning  of  the  New  Empire.  The  number- 
ing of  the  dynasties  itself  sufhees  to  disclose  something  catastrophic.  In  the 
lists  of  kings  the  names  appear  successive  or  parallel,  usurpers  of  obscurest 
origin,  generals,  people  with  strange  titles,  often  reigning  only  a few  days. 
With  the  very  first  king  of  the  Xlllth  Dynasty  the  high-Nile  records  at  Semne 
break  off,  and  with  his  successor  the  archives  at  Kahun  come  to  an  end.  It  is 
the  time  out  of  which  the  Leiden  Papyrus  portrays  the  great  social  revolution. ^ 

^ Krumbaclier,  op.  cit.,  393. 

2 And  perhaps  not  in  Baghdad  alone,  for  the  gifted  Maniakes,  who  was  hailed  by  the  army  in 
Sicily  as  Emperor  and  fell  in  1043  H his  march  on  Byzantium,  must  have  been  a Turk. 

® 1785--1580.  See,  for  the  following,  Ed.  Meyer,  Gtsch.  d.  Alt.  §§  138,  et  seq.;  Weill,  La  Fin  du 
myen  empire  igyptkn  (1318).  That  Ed.  Meyer’s  assignment  is  correct  as  compared  with  the  1670  years 
of  Petrie  has  long  been  proved  by  the  thickness  of  the  strata  in  which  objects  have  been  found  and  the 
tempo  of  the  style-evolution  (Minoan  included).  Here  it  is  demonstrated  afresh  by  comparison 
with  corresponding  sections  in  the  other  Cultures. 

^ p.  387.  _ •• 

® Erman,  Mahnworte  eines  dgypt.  Fropheten*'  (JSit^.  Freuss.  Akad.^  1313,  pp.  804,  ct  seq.):  “The 
higher  officials  are  displaced,  the  land  robbed  of  its  royalty  by  a few  madmen,  and  the  counsellors 
of  the  old  state  pay  their  court  to  upstarts;  administration  has  ceased,  documents  arc  destroyed, 
all  social  differences  abolished,  the  courts  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  mob.  The  noble  classes  go 
hungry  and  in  rags,  their  children  are  battered  on  the  wall,  and  their  mummies  torn  from  the  grave. 
Mean  fellows  become  rich  and  swagger  in  the  palaces  on  the  strength  of  the  herds  and  ships  that  they 
have  taken  from  their  rightful  owners.  Former  slave-girls  become  insolent  and  aliens  lord  it.  Rob- 
bery and  murder  rule,  cities  are  laid  waste,  public  buildings  burned  down.  The  harvest  diminishes, 
no  one  thinks  now  of  cleanliness,  births  are  few  — and  oh,  that  mankind  might  cease!”  Here 
is  the  very  picture  of  the  megalopolitan  and  Late  revolution,  as  it  was  enacted  in  the  Hellen- 
istic (p.  405)  and  in  1783  and  1871  in  Paris.  It  is  the  world-city  masses,  will-less  tools  of  the  am- 
bition of  leaders  who  demolish  every  remnant  of  order,  who  desire  to  see  in  the  outer  world  the  same 
chaos  as  reigns  within  their  own  selves.  Whether  these  cynical  and  hopeless  attempts  start  from 
alien  intruders  like  the  Hyksos  or  the  Turks,  or  from  slaves  as  in  the  case  of  Spartacus  and  Ail; 
whether  the  division  of  property  is  shouted  for  as  at  Syracuse  or  has  a book  for  banner  like  Marxism 
— all  this  is  superficial.  It  is  wholly  immaterial  what  slogans  scream  to  the  wind  while  the  gates 
and  the  skulls  are  being  beaten  in.  Destruction  is  the  true  and  only  impulse,  and  Csesarism  the  only 
issue.  The  world-city,  the  land-devouring  demon,  has  set  its  rootless  and  futureless  men  in  motion; 
and  in  destroying  they  die. 


4z8  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

The  fall  of  the  Governmeat  and  the  victory  of  the  mass  is  followed  by  outbreaks 
of  the  army  and  the  rise  of  ambitious  soldiers.  In  Egypt  from  about  1680 
appears  the  name  of  the  “Hyksos,”^  a designation  with  which  the  historians 
of  the  New  Empire,  who  no  longer  understood  or  wished  to  understand  the 
meaning  of  the  epoch,  covered  up  the  shame  of  these  years.  These  Hyksos, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever,  played  the  part  that  the  Armenians  played  in 
Byzantium;  and  in  the  Classical  world  too,  the  destinies  of  the  Cimbri  and 
Teutones,  would  have  gone  the  same  way  had  they  defeated  Marius  and  Ms 
legions  of  city  canaille;  they  would  have  filled  the  armies  of  the  Triumvirs 
again  and  again,  and  in  the  end  probably  set  up  barbarian  chieftains  in  their 
place  — for  the  case  of  Jugurtha  shows  the  lengths  to  which  foreigners  dared 
to  go  with  the  Rome  of  those  days.  The  provenance  or  constitution  of  the 
intruders  does  not  matter  — they  might  be  body-guards,  insurgent  slaves, 
Jacobins,  or  purely  alien  tribes.  What  does  matter  is  what  they  were  for  the 
Egyptian  world  in  that  century  of  theirs.  In  the  end  they  set  up  a state  in  the 
Western  Delta  and  built  a capital,  Auaris,  for  it.^  One  of  their  leaders,  Khyan 
by  name,  who  styled  himself,  not  Pharaoh,  but  '‘Embracer  of  the  Country*’  and 
“prince  of  the  young  men**  (names  as  essentially  revolutionary  as  the  Consul 
sine  collega  or  dictator  preptuus  of  Csesar’s  time)  a man  probably  of  the  stamp  of 
John  Tzimisces,  ruled  over  all  Egypt  and  spread  his  renown  as  far  as  Crete  and 
the  Euphrates.  But  after  him  began  a fight  of  all  the  districts  for  the  Imperium, 
and  out  of  that  fight  Amasis  and  the  Theban  dynasty  eventually  emerged  vic- 
torious. 

For  us  this  time  of  Contending  States  began  with  Napoleon  and  his  violent- 
arbitrary  government  by  order.  His  head  was  the  first  in  our  world  to  make 
effective  the  notion  of  a military  and  at  the  same  time  popular  world-domina- 
tion— something  altogether  different  from  the  Empire  of  Charles  V and  even 
the  British  Colonial  Empire  of  his  own  day.  If  the  nineteenth  century  has  been 
relatively  poor  in  great  wars  — and  revolutions  — and  has  overcome  its  worst 
crises  diplomatically  by  means  of  congresses,  this  has  been  due  precisely  to  the 
continuous  and  terrific  war-preparedness  which  has  made  disputants,  fearful  at 
the  eleventh  hour  of  the  consequences,  postpone  the  definitive  decision  again 
and  again,  and  led  to  the  substitution  of  chess-moves  for  war.  For  this  is  the 
century  of  gigantic  permanent  armies  and  universal  compulsory  service.  We 
ourselves  are  too  near  to  it  to  see  it  under  this  terrifying  aspect.  In  ail  world- 
history  there  is  no  parallel.  Ever  since  Napoleon,  hundreds  of  thousands,  and 

^ The  Papyrus  says : “the  archer-folk  from  without”  — that  is,  the  bafharian  mercenary  troops. 
To  these  the  native  youth  attached  itself. 

^ Glance  also  at  the  Negro-state  in  Irak  and  the  “contemporary”  attempts  of  Spartacus,  Ser- 
torius,  and  Sextus  Pompey,  and  we  get  a fair  idea  of  the  variety  of  the  possibilities.  Weill  assumes, 
1785-1765,  the  collapse  of  the  Kingdom,  a usurper  (a  general);  1765-1675,  numerous  small  po- 
tentates, in  the  Delta  wholly  independent;  1675-1633,  struggle  for  unity,  especially  the  rulers  of 
Thebes,  with  an  ever-increasing  retinue  of  dependent  rulers,  including  the  Hyksos;  1633,  victory 
of  the  Hyksos  and  defeat  of  the  Thebans;  1591--1571,  final  triumph  of  the  Thebans. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  4x9 

latterly  iniilions 5 of  men  have  stood  ready  to  march,  and  mighty  fleets  renewed 
every  ten  years  have  filled  the  harbours.  It  is  a war  without  war,  a war  of 
overbidding  in  equipment  and  preparedness,  a war  of  figures  and  tempo  and 
technics,  and  the  diplomatic  dealings  have  been  not  of  court  with  court,  but  of 
headquarters  with  headquarters.  The  longer  the  discharge  was  delayed,  the 
more  huge  became  the  means  and  the  more  intolerable  the  tension.  This  is  the 
Faustian,  the  dynamic,  form  of  “ the  Contending  States  ” during  the  first  century 
of  that  period,  but  it  ended  with  the  explosion  of  the  World  War.  For  the 
demand  of  these  four  years  has  been  altogether  too  much  for  the  principle  of 
universal  service  — child  of  the  French  Revolution,  revolutionary  through  and 
through,  as  it  is  in  this  form  — and  for  all  tactical  methods  evolved  from  it.^ 
The  place  of  the  permanent  armies  as  we  know  them  will  gradually  be  taken 
by  professional  forces  of  volunteer  war-keen  soldiers;  and  from  millions  we 
shall  revert  to  hundreds  of  thousands.  But  if  so  facto  this  second  century  will 
be  one  of  actually  Contending  States.  These  armies  are  not  substitutes  for  war 
— they  ZTC  for  war,  and  they  want  war.  Within  two  generations  it  will  be 
they  whose  will  prevails  over  that  of  all  the  comfortables  put  together.  In 
these  wars  of  theirs  for  the  heritage  of  the  whole  world,  continents  will  be 
staked,  India,  China,  South  Africa,  Russia,  Islam  called  out,  new  technics  and 
tactics  played  and  counterplayed.  The  great  cosmopolitan  foci  of  power  will 
dispose  at  their  pleasure  of  smaller  states  — their  territory,  their  economy  and 
their  men  alike  — all  that  is  now  merely  province,  passive  object,  means  to 
end,  and  its  destinies  are  without  importance  to  the  great  march  of  things. 
We  ourselves,  in  a very  few  years,  have  learned  to  take  little  or  no  notice  of 
events  that  before  the  War  would  have  horrified  the  world;  who  to-day  seri- 
ously thinks  about  the  millions  that  perish  in  Russia? 

Again  and  again  between  these  catastrophes  of  blood  and  terror  the  cry 
rises  up  for  reconciliation  of  the  peoples  and  for  peace  on  earth.  It  is  but 
the  background  and  the  echo  of  the  grand  happening,  but,  as  such,  so  necessary 
that  we  have  to  assume  its  existence  even  if,  as  in  Hyksos  Egypt,  in  Baghdad 
and  Byzantium,  no  tradition  tells  of  it.  Esteem  as  we  may  the  wish  towards 
all  this,  we  must  have  the  courage  to  face  facts  as  they  are  — that  is  the  hall- 
mark of  men  of  race-quality  and  it  is  by  the  being  of  these  men  that  alone 
history  is.  Life  if  it  would  be  great,  is  hard;  it  lets  choose  only  between  vic- 
tory and  ruin,  not  between  war  and  peace,  and  to  the  victory  belong  the  sacrifices 
of  victory.  For  that  which  shuffles  querulously  and  jealously  by  the  side  of  the 
events  is  only  literature,  — written  or  thought  or  lived  literature  — mere 
truths  that  lose  themselves  in  the  moving  crush  of  facts.  History  has  never 
deigned  to  take  notice  of  these  propositions.  In  the  Chinese  world  Hiang-Sui 
tried,  as  early  as  535,  to  found  a peace  league.  In  the  period  of  the  Contending 
States,  imperialism  (Lien-hen^  was  opposed  by  the  League  of  Nations  idea 

^ As  an  inspiriting  idea  it  may  be  retained;  translated  into  actuality  it  will  never  be  again. 


430  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

(^Hoh-tsmg^y  p2.tticxilsitlj  in  the  southern  regions,  but  it  was  foredoomed  like 
everf  half-measure  that  steps  into  the  path  of  a whole,  and  it  had  vanished 
even  before  the  victory  of  the  North.  But  both  tendencies  alike  rejected  the 
political  taste  of  the  Taoists,  who,  in  those  fearful  centuries,  elected  for  intel- 
lectual self-disarmament,  thereby  reducing  themselves  to  the  level  of  mere 
material  to  be  used  up  by  others  and  for  others  in  the  grand  decisions.  Even 
Roman  politics  — deliberately  improvident  as  the  Classical  spirit  was  in  all 
other  respects  — at  least  made  one  attempt  to  bring  the  whole  world  into  one 
system  of  equal  co-ordinated  forces  which  should  do  away  with  all  necessity 
for  further  wars  — that  is,  when  at  the  fall  of  Hannibal  Rome  forwent  the 
chance  of  incorporating  the  East.  But  reluctance  was  useless;  the  party  of  the 
younger  Scipio  went  over  to  frank  Imperialism  in  order  to  make  an  end  of 
chaos,  although  its  clear-sighted  leader  foresaw  therein  the  doom  of  his  city, 
which  possessed  (and  in  a high  degree)  the  native  Classical  incapacity  for 
organizing  anything  whatever.  The  way  from  Alexander  to  Cassar  is  unam- 
biguous and  unavoidable,  and  the  strongest  nation  of  any  and  every  Culture, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  willing  or  unwilling,  has  had  to  tread  it. 

From  the  rigour  of  these  facts  there  is  no  refuge.  The  Hague  Conference  of 
1907  was  the  prelude  of  the  World  War;  the  Washington  Conference  of  192.1 
will  have  been  that  of  other  wars.  The  history  of  these  times  is  no  longer  an 
intellectual  match  of  wits  in  elegant  forms  for  pluses  and  minuses,  from  which 
either  side  can  withdraw  when  it  pleases.  The  alternatives  now  are  to  stand 
fast  or  to  go  under  — there  is  no  middle  course.  The  only  moral  that  the  logic 
of  things  permits  to  us  now  is  that  of  the  climber  on  the  face  of  the  crag — 
a moment’s  weakness  and  all  is  over.  To-day  all  “philosophy”  is  nothing 
but  an  inward  abdication  and  resignation,  or  a craven  hope  of  escaping 
realities  by  means  of  mysticisms.  It  was  just  the  same  in  Roman  times.  Tacitus 
tells  us  ^ how  the  famous  Musonius  Rufus  tried,  by  exhortations  on  the  bless- 
ings of  peace  and  the  evils  of  war,  to  influence  the  legions  that  in  70  stood 
before  the  gates  of  Rome,  and  barely  escaped  alive  from  their  blows.  The  mili- 
tary commander  Avidius  Cassius  called  the  Emperor  Marcus  Aurelius  a “ phil- 
osophical old  woman.” 

In  these  conditions  so  much  of  old  and  great  traditions  as  remains,  so  much 
of  historical  “fitness”  and  experience  as  has  got  into  the  blood  of  the  twentieth- 
century  nations,  acquires  an  unequalled  potency.  For  us  creative  piety,  or  (to 
use  a more  fundamental  term)  the  pulse  that  has  come  down  to  us  from  first 
origins,  adheres  only  to  forms  that  are  older  than  the  Revolution  and  Napoleon,^ 
forms  which  grew  and  were  not  made.  Every  remnant  of  them,  however  tiny, 
that  has  kept  itself  alive  in  the  being  of  any  self-contained  minority  whatever 

^ Piton,  op.  cit,,  p.  52.1. 

2 Hist.,  Ill,  I. 

® Including  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  of  America.  Only  thus  can  we  account  for  the 
reverence  that  the  American  cherishes  for  it,  even  where  he  clearly  sees  its  insufEciency. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  431 

will  before  long  rise  to  incalculable  values  and  bring  about  historical  effects 
which  no  one  yet  imagines  to  be  possible.  The  traditions  of  an  old  monarchy, 
of  an  old  aristocracy,  of  an  old  polite  society,  in  so  much  as  they  are  still  healthy 
enough  to  keep  clear  of  professional  or  professorial  politics,  in  so  far  as  they 
possess  honour,  abnegation,  discipline,  the  genuine  sense  of  a great  mission 
(race-quality,  that  is,  and  training),  sense  of  duty  and  sacrifice  — can  become  a 
centre  which  holds  together  the  being-stream  of  an  entire  people  and  enables  it 
to  outlast  this  time  and  make  its  landfall  in  the  future.  To  be  “in  condition'’ 
is  everything.  It  falls  to  us  to  live  in  the  most  trying  times  known  to  the  his- 
tory of  a great  Culture.  The  last  race  to  keep  its  form,  the  last  living  tradi- 
tion, the  last  leaders  who  have  both  at  their  back,  will  pass  through  and 
onward,  victors. 

X 

By  the  term  “Cassarism”  I mean  that  kind  of  government  which,  irre- 
spective of  any  constitutional  formulation  that  it  may  have,  is  in  its  inward  self 
a return  to  thorough  formlessness.  It  does  not  matter  that  Augustus  in  Rome, 
and  Hwang-ti  in  China,  Amasis  in  Egypt  and  Alp  Arslan  in  Baghdad  disguised 
their  position  under  antique  forms.  The  spirit  of  these  forms  was  dead,^  and 
so  all  institutions,  however  carefully  maintained,  were  thenceforth  destitute 
of  all  meaning  and  weight.  Real  importance  centred  in  the  wholly  personal 
power  exercised  by  the  Cassar,  or  by  anybody  else  capable  of  exercising  it  in  his 
place.  It  is  the  rkidive  of  a form-fulfilled  world  into  primitivism,  into  the 
cosmic-historyless.  Biological  stretches  of  time  once  more  take  the  place 
vacated  by  historical  periods.^ 

At  the  beginning,  where  the  Civilization  is  developing  to  full  bloom  (to- 
day), there  stands  the  miracle  of  the  CosmopoHs,  the  great  petrifact,  a symbol  of 
the  formless  — vast,  splendid,  spreading  in  insolence.  It  draws  within  itself 
the  being-streams  of  the  now  impotent  countryside,  human  masses  that  are 
wafted  as  dunes  from  one  to  another  or  flow  like  loose  sand  into  the  chinks 
of  the  stone.  Here  money  and  intellect  celebrate  their  greatest  and  their  last 
triumphs.  It  is  the  most  artificial,  the  cleverest  phenomenon  manifested  in 
the  light-world  of  human  eyes  — uncanny,  “too  good  to  be  true,”  standing 
already  almost  beyond  the  possibilities  of  cosmic  formation. 

Presently,  however,  the  idea-less  facts  come  forward  again,  naked  and 
gigantic.  The  eternal-cosmic  pulse  has  finally  overcome  the  intellectual 
tensions  of  a few  centuries.  In  the  form  of  democracy,  money  has  won.  There 
has  been  a period  in  which  politics  were  almost  its  preserve.  But  as  soon  as 
it  has  destroyed  the  old  orders  of  the  Culture,  the  chaos  gives  forth  a new  and 

^ Cassar  recognized  this  clearly.  Nihil  tsse  tmyuhlicam,  appdlationem  modo  sine  corpre  ac  specie"' 
(Suctonms,  Casar,  jt). 

^ Secp,.48.'".:' 


431  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

overpowering  factor  that  penetrates  to  the  very  elementals  of  Becoming  ^ — 
the  C^sar-men.  Before  them  the  money  collapses.  The  Imperial  Age^  in  every 
Culture  alike,  signifies  the  end  of  the  politics  of  mind  and  money.  The  powers  of  the 
blood,  unbroken  bodily  forces,  resume  their  ancient  lordship.  “Race”  springs 
forth,  pure  and  irresistible  — the  strongest  win  and  the  residue  is  their  spoil. 
They  seize  the  management  of  the  world,  and  the  realm  of  books  and  problems 
petrifies  or  vanishes  from  memory.  From  now  on,  new  destinies  in  the  style 
of  the  pre-Culture  time  are  possible  afresh,  and  visible  to  the  consciousness 
without  cloaks  of  causality.  There  is  no  inward  difference  more  between  the 
lives  of  Septimius  Severus  and  Gallienus  and  those  of  Alaric  and  Odoacet. 
Rameses,  Trajan,  Wu-ti  belong  together  in  a uniform  up-and-down  of  history- 
less time-stretches.^ 

Once  the  Imperial  Age  has  arrived,  there  are  no  more  political  problems. 
People  manage  with  the  situation  as  it  is  and  the  powers  that  be.  In  the  period 
of  Contending  States,  torrents  of  blood  had  reddened  the  pavements  of  all 
world-cities,  so  that  the  great  truths  of  Democracy  might  be  turned  into 
actualities,  and  for  the  winning  of  rights  without  which  life  seemed  not  worth 
the  living.  Now  these  rights  are  won,  but  the  grandchildren  cannot  be  moved, 
even  by  punishment,  to  make  use  of  them.  A hundred  years  more,  and  even  the 
historians  will  no  longer  understand  the  old  controversies.  Already  by  Cxsar’s 
time  reputable  people  had  almost  ceased  to  take  part  in  the  elections.^  It 
embittered  the  life  of  the  great  Tiberius  that  the  most  capable  men  of  his  time 
held  aloof  from  politics,  and  Nero  could  not  even  by  threats  compel  the  Equites 
to  come  to  Rome  in  order  to  exercise  their  rights.  This  is  the  end  of  the  great 
politics.  The  conflict  of  intelligences  that  had  served  as  substitute  for  war 
must  give  place  to  war  itself  in  its  most  primitive  form. 

It  is,  therefore,  a complete  misunderstanding  of  the  meaning  of  the  period  to 
presume,  as  Mommsen  did,^  a deep  design  of  subdivision  in  the  “dyarchy” 
fashioned  by  Augustus,  with  its  partition  of  powers  between  Princeps  and 
Senate.  A century  earlier  this  constitution  would  have  been  a real  thing,  but 
that  would  in  itself  suffice  to  make  it  impossible  for  such  an  idea  to  have  entered 
the  heads  of  the  present  force-men.  Now  it  meant  nothing  but  the  attempt  of 
a weak  personality  to  deceive  itself  as  to  inexorable  facts  by  mantling  them  in 
empty  forms.  Caesar  saw  things  as  they  were  and  was  guided  in  the  exercise 
of  his  rulership  by  definite  and  unsentimental  practical  considerations.  The 
legislation  of  his  last  months  was  concerned  wholly  with  transitional  provi- 

^ See  p.  48. 

2 Cicero,  in  his  Fro  Sestio^  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  five  people  for  each  tribe  attended 
plebiscites,  and  these  really  belonged  to  tribes  other  than  that  which  they  were  representing.  Bur 
these  five  were  present  only  in  order  to  have  themselves  bought  by  the  possessors  of  the  real  power. 
Yet  it  was  hardly  fifty  years  since  the  Italians  had  died  in  masses  for  this  franchise. 

® And,  strangely,  Ed.  Meyer  also,  in  his  masterpiece  Casars  Monarchh^  the  one  work  of  statesman- 
like quality  yet  written  about  this  epoch  — and  previously  in  his  essay  on  Augustus  (Kkine  Schriften, 
pp.  441,  Ct  scq.). 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  433 

sions,  none  of  which  were  intended  to  be  permanent . This  precisely  is  what  has 
generally  been  overlooked.  He  was  far  too  deep  a judge  of  things  to  anticipate 
development  or  to  settle  its  definitive  forms  at  this  moment,  with  the  Parthian 
War  impending.  But  Augustus,  like  Pompey  before  him,  was  not  the  master 
of  his  following,  but  thoroughly  dependent  upon  it  and  its  views  of  things. 
The  form  of  the  Principate  was  not  at  all  his  discovery,  but  the  doctrinaire 
ex:ecution  of  an  obsolete  party-ideal  that  Cicero  — another  weakling  — had 
formulated.^  When,  on  the  13th  January  2.7,  Augustus  gave  back  the  state- 
power  to  the  “ Senate  and  People’*  of  Rome  — a scene  all  the  more  meaningless 
because  of  its  sincerity  — he  kept  the  Tribunate  for  himself.  In  fact,  this  was 
the  one  element  of  the  polity  that  could  manifest  itself  in  actuality.  The  Tribune 
was  the  legitimate  successor  of  the  Tyrant,^  and  as  long  ago  as  iia  b.c.  Caius 
Gracchus  had  put  into  the  title  a connotation  limited  no  longer  by  the  legal 
bounds  of  the  office,  but  only  by  the  personal  talents  of  the  incumbent.  From 
him  it  is  a direct  line  through  Marius  and  Caesar  to  the  young  Nero,  who  set 
himself  to  defeat  the  political  purposes  of  his  mother  Agrippina.  The  Princeps,® 
on  the  other  hand,  was  thenceforth  only  a costume,  a rank  — very  likely  a 
fact  in  society,  certainly  not  a fact  in  politics.  And  this,  precisely,  was  the 
conception  invested  with  light  and  glamour  by  the  theory  of  Cicero,  and 
already  — and  by  him  of  all  people  — associated  with  the  Divus-idea.'^  The 
‘‘co-operation”  of  the  Senate  and  People,  on  the  contrary,  was  an  antiquated 
ceremonial,  with  about  as  much  life  in  it  as  the  rites  of  the  Fratres  Arvales  — 
also  restored  by  Augustus.  The  great  parties  of  the  Gracchan  age  had  long 
become  retinues  ■ — Caesarians  and  Pompeians  — and  finally  there  only  remained 
on  the  one  side  the  formless  omnipotence,  the  plain  brutal  “fact,”  the  Caesar  — 
or  whoever  managed  to  get  the  Caesar  under  his  influence  — and  on  the  other 
side  the  handful  of  narrow  ideologues  who  concealed  dissatisfaction  under 
philosophy  and  thenceforward  sought  to  advance  their  ideals  by  conspiracy. 
What  these  Stoics  were  in  Rome,  the  Confucians  were  in  China  — and,  seen 
thus,  the  episode  of  the  “ Burning  of  the  Books,”  decreed  by  the  Chinese  Augus- 
tus in  aia,  begins  to  be  intelligible  through  the  reproach  of  immense  vandalism 
that  the  minds  ofTater  literates  fastened  upon  it.  But,  after  all,  these  Stoic 
enthusiasts  for  an  ideal  that  had  become  impossible  had  killed  Cassar:  ® to  the 

^ De  Re  Ruhlica^  54  b.c.,  a monograph  intended  for  Pompey. 

2 Sec  p.  395. 

® See  p.  409. 

^ In  S omnium  Scipionis,  VI,  2.6,  he  is  a god  who  so  rales  the  State  ^uam  hum  mundum  ilk  princeps 
deus, 

® It  was  with  every  justification  that,  in  the  presence  of  the  corpse,  Brutus  called  out  the  name 
of  Cicero,  while  Antony,  on  his  side,  denounced  him  as  the  intellectual  author  of  the  deed.  But 
this  “freedom”  meant  nothing  but  the  oligarchy  of  a few  families,  for  the  masses  had  long  ago 
become  tiredjOf  their  rights.  Nor  is  it  in  the  least  surprising  that  Money  was  behind  Intellect 
in  the  murder,  for  the  great  fortunes  of  Rome  saw  in  Csesarism  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  their 
:powcr.  ■ 


434  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

Divus“Cult  they  opposed  a Cato-  and  Brums-cult;  the  philosophers  in  the  Sen- 
ate (which  by  then  was  only  a noble  club)  never  wearied  of  lamenting  the 
downfall  of  “freedom’’  and  fomenting  conspiracies  such  as  Piso’s  in  65.  Had 
this  been  the  state  of  things  at  Nero’s  death,  it  would  have  been  Sulla  over 
again;  and  that  is  why  Nero  put  to  death  the  Stoic  Thrasea  Pxtus,  why  Ves- 
pasian executed  Helvidius  Priscus,  and  why  copies  of  the  history  of  Cremutius 
Cordus,  which  lauded  Brutus  as  the  last  of  the  Romans,  were  collected  and  burnt 
in  Rome.  These  were  acts  of  defensive  State  necessity  vis-^-vis  blind  ideology  — ' 
acts  such  as  those  we  know  of  Cromwell  and  Robespierre  — and  it  was  in 
exactly  the  same  position  that  the  Chinese  Cxsars  found  themselves  vis-h-vis  the 
school  of  Confucius,  which  had  formerly  worked  out  their  ideal  of  a state- 
constitution  and  now  had  no  notion  of  enduring  the  actuality.  This  great 
Burning  of  the  Books  was  nothing  but  the  destruction  of  one  part  of  the  politico- 
philosophical  literature  and  the  abolition  of  propaganda  and  secret  organiza- 
tions.^ This  defensive  lasted  in  both  Imperia  for  a century,  and  then  even 
reminiscences  of  party-political  passions  faded  out  and  the  two  philosophies 
became  the  ruling  world-outlook  of  the  Imperial  age  in  its  maturity.^  But  the 
world  was  now  the  theatre  of  tragic  family-histories  into  which  state-histories 
were  dissolved;  the  Julian-Claudian  house  destroyed  Roman  history,  and  the 
house  of  Shi-hwang-ti  (even  from  2.06  b.c.)  destroyed  Chinese,  and  we  darkly  dis- 
cern something  of  the  same  kind  in  the  destinies  of  the  Egyptian  Queen 
Hatshepsut  and  her  brothers  (i50i“i447).  It  is  the  last  step  to  the  definitive. 
With  world-peace — -the  pace  of  high  policies  — the  “sword  side”  ® of  being 
retreats  and  the  “spindle  side”  rules  again;  henceforth  there  are  only  private 
histories,  private  destinies,  private  ambitions,  from  top  to  bottom,  from  the 
miserable  troubles  of  fellaheen  to  the  dreary  feuds  of  Cxsars  for  the  private 
possession  of  the  world.  The  wars  of  the  age  of  world-peace  are  private  wars, 
more  fearful  than  any  State  wars  because  they  are  formless. 

For  world-peace  — which  has  often  existed  in  fact  ■—  involves  the  private 
renunciation  of  war  on  the  part  of  the  immense  majority,  but  along  with  this 
it  involves  an  unavowed  readiness  to  submit  to  being  the  booty  of  others  who 
do  not  renounce  it.  It  begins  with  the  State-destroying  wish  for  universal 
reconciliation,  and  it  ends  in  nobody’s  moving  a finger  so  long  as  misfortune 
only  touches  his  neighbour.  Already  under  Marcus  Aurelius  each  city  and 
each  land-patch  was  thinking  of  itself,  and  the  activities  of  the  ruler  were  his 

^ Taoism,  on  the  other  hand,  was  supported,  as  preaching  the  entire  renunciation  of  politics. 
Said  Shakespeare's  Caesar : 

“Let  me  have  men  about  me  that  arc  fat, 

Slcek-hcadcd  men  and  such  as  sleep  o'nights.*’ 

2 Tacitus,  even,  failed  to  understand.  He  hated  these  first  Caesars,  because  they  defended  them- 
selves by  every  imaginable  means  against  a stealthy  opposition  — in  his  own  circles  — an  opposition 
that  from  Trajan’s  time  no  longer  existed,  (yet  a little  longer,  and  the  Emperor  Marcus  Aurelius 
could  himself  be  a Stoic.  Tr.) 

32.9. 


STATE  AND  HISTORY  435 

private  affair  as  other  men’s  were  theirs.  The  remoter  peoples  were  as  indiffer- 
ent to  him  and  his  troops  and  his  aims  as  they  were  to  the  projects  of  Germanic 
war-bands.  On  this  spritml  premiss  a second  Vikingism  develops.  The 
state  of  being  in  form”  passes  from  nations  to  bands  and  retinues  of  adventur- 
ers, self-styled  Cassars,  seceding  generals,  barbarian  kings,  and  what  not 
in  whose  eyes  the  population  becomes  in  the  end  merely  a part  of  the  landscape. 
There  is  a deep  relation  between  the  heroes  of  the  Mycenasan  primitive  age  and 
the  soldier-emperors  of  Rome,  and  between,  say,  Menes  and  Rameses  II.  In  our 
Germanic  world  the  spirits  of  Alaric  and  Theodoric  will  come  again  — there 
is  a first  hint  of  them  in  Cecil  Rhodes  — and  the  alien  executioners  of  the 
Russian  preface,  from  Jenghis:  Khan  to  Trotski  (with  the  episode  of  Petrine 
Tsarism  between  them)  are,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  very  little  different  from 
most  of  the  pretenders  of  the  Latin- American  republics,  whose  private  struggles 
have  long  since  put  an  end  to  the  form-rich  age  of  the  Spanish  Baroque. 

With  the  formed  state,  high  history  also  lays  itself  down  weary  to  sleep. 
Man  becomes  a plant  again,  adhering  to  the  soil,  dumb  and  enduring.  The 
timeless  village  and  the  “eternal”  peasant  ^ reappear,  begetting  children  and 
burying  seed  in  Mother  Earth  — a busy,  not  inadequate  swarm,  over  which 
the  tempest  of  soldier-emperors  passingly  blows.  In  the  midst  of  the  land  lie 
the  old  world-cities,  empty  receptacles  of  an  extinguished  soul,  in  which  a 
historyless  mankind  slowly  nests  itself.  Men  live  from  hand  to  mouth,  with 
petty  thrifts  and  petty  fortunes,  and  endure.  Masses  are  trampled  on  in  the 
conflicts  of  the  conquerors  who  contend  for  the  power  and  the  spoil  of  this 
world,  but  the  survivors  fill  up  the  gaps  with  a primitive  fertility  and  suffer  on. 
And  while  in  high  places  there  is  eternal  alternance  of  victory  and  defeat,  those 
in  the  depths  pray,  pray  with  that  mighty  piety  of  the  Second  Religiousness  that 
has  overcome  all  doubts  for  ever.^  There,  in  the  souls,  world-peace,  the  peace 
of  God,  the  bliss  of  grey-haired  monks  and  hermits,  is  become  actual  — and 
there  alone.  It  has  awakened  that  depth  in  the  endurance  of  suffering  which 
the  historical  man  in  the  thousand  years  of  his  development  has  never  known. 
Only  with  the  end  of  grand  History  does  holy,  still  Being  reappear.  It  is  a 
drama  noble  in  its  aimlessness,  noble  and  aimless  as  the  course  of  the  stars,  the 
rotation  of  the  earth,  and  alternance  of  land  and  sea,  of  ice  and  virgin  forest 
upon  its  face.  We  may  marvel  at  it  or  we  may  lament  it  — but  it  is  there. 

^ Pp.  89  and  349, 

2 jio 


I 

CB-Kvim.  xn 
THE  STATE 
(C) 

PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS 


CHAPTER  XII 


THE  STATE 

(C) 

PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS 

I 

To  Politics  as  an  idea  we  have  given  more  thought  than  has  been  good  for  us, 
since,  correspondingly,  we  have  understood  all  the  less  about  the  observation  of 
Politics  as  a reality.  The  great  statesmen  are  accustomed  to  act  immediately 
and  on  the  basis  of  a sure  flair  for  facts.  This  is  so  self-evident,  to  them,  that  it 
simply  never  enters  their  heads  to  reflect  upon  the  basic  general  principles  of 
their  action  — supposing  indeed  that  such  exist.  In  all  ages  they  have  known 
what  they  had  to  do,  and  any  theory  of  this  knowledge  has  been  foreign  to 
both  their  capacities  and  their  tastes.  But  the  professional  thinkers  who  have 
turned  their  attention  to  the  faifs  accomplis  of  men  have  been  so  remote,  in- 
wardly, from  these  actions  that  they  have  just  spun  for  themselves  a web  of 
abstractions  — for  preference,  abstraction-myths  like  justice,  virtue,  freedom  — 
and  then  applied  them  as  criteria  to  past  and,  especially,  future  historical 
happening.  Thus  in  the  end  they  have  forgotten  that  concepts  are  only  con- 
cepts, and  brought  themselves  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  a political  science 
whereby  we  can  form  the  course  of  the  world  according  to  an  ideal  recipe. 
As  nothing  of  the  kind  has  ever  or  anywhere  happened,  political  doing  has 
come  to  be  considered  as  so  trivial  in  comparison  with  abstract  thinking  that 
they  debate  in  their  books  whether  there  is  a “ genius  of  action”  at  all. 

Here,  on  the  contrary,  the  attempt  will  be  made  to  give,  instead  of  an  ideo- 
logical system,  a physiognomy  of  politics  as  it  has  actually  been  practised  in  the 
course  of  general  history,  and  not  as  it  might  or  ought  to  have  been  practised. 
The  problem  was,  and  is,  to  penetrate  to  the  final  meaning  of  great  events,  to 
‘’‘  see”  them,  to  feel  and  to  transcribe  the  symbolically  important  in  them. 
The  projects  of  world-improvers  and  the  actuality  of  History  have  nothing 
to  do  with  one  another.^ 

The  being-streams  of  humanity  are  called  History  when  we  regard  them  as 
movement,  and  family,  estate,  people,  nation,  when  we  regard  them  as  the 

^ “Empires  perish,  but  a good  verse  stands,**  said  W.  von  Humboldt  on  the  field  of  Waterloo. 
But,  all  the  same,  the  personality  of  Napoleon  preformed  the  history  of  the  next  century.  Good 
verses ! — he  should  have  questioned  a peasant  by  the  way-side.  They  ‘ * stand”  - for  literary  teach- 
ing. Plato  is  eternal  — for  philologists.  But  Napoleon  inwardly  rules  all  o£  us,  our  states  and 
our  armies,  our  public  opinion,  the  whole  of  our  political  outlook,  and  the  more  effectually  the  less 
we  are  conscious  of  it. 

:439-  ' ' 


440  ■ .THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

object  moved. ^ Politics  is  the  way  in  which  this  fluent  Being  maintains  itself, 
grows ^ triumphs  over  other  life-streams.  All  living  is  plitics,  in  every  trait  of 
instinct,  in  the  inmost  marrow. ^ That  which  we  nowadays  like  to  call  life- 
energy  (vitality),  the  “it’*  in  us  that  at  all  costs  strives  forward  and  upward, 
the  blind  cosmic  drive  to  validity  and  power  that  at  the  same  time  remains 
plantwise  and  racewise,  bound  up  with  the  earth,  the  “home”“land;  the 
directedness,  the  need  to  actualize  — it  is  this  that  appears  in  every  higher 
mankind,  as  its  political  life,  seeking  naturally  and  inevitably  the  great 
decisions  that  determine  whether  it  shall  be,  or  shall  suffer,  a Destiny.  For  it 
grows  or  it  dies  out;  there  is  no  third  possibility. 

For  this  reason  the  nobility,  as  expression  of  a strong  race-quality,  is  the 
truly  political  Order,  and  training  and  not  shaping  is  the  truly  political  sort  of 
education.  Every  great  politician,  a centre  of  forces  in  the  stream  of  happening, 
has  something  of  the  noble  in  his  feeling  of  self-vocation  and  inward  obliga- 
tion. On  the  other  hand,  all  that  is  microcosmic  and  “intellect”  is  unpolitical, 
and  so  there  is  a something  of  priestliness  in  all  program-politics  and  ideology. 
The  best  diplomats  are  the  children;  in  their  play,  or  when  they  want  some- 
thing, a cosmic  “it”  that  is  bound  up  in  the  individual  being  breaks  out  im- 
mediately and  with  the  sure  tread  of  the  sleep-walker.  They  do  not  learn,  but 
unlearn,  this  art  of  early  years  as  they  grow  older  — hence  the  rarity  in  the 
world  of  adults  of  the  Statesman. 

It  is  only  in  and  between  these  being-streams  that  fill  the  field  of  the  high 
Culture  that  high  policy  exists.  They  are  only  possible,  therefore,  in  the  plural. 
A people  ix,  really,  only  in  relation  to  peoples.®  But  the  natural,  “race,”  rela- 
tion between  them  is  for  that  very  reason  a relation  of  war  — this  is  a fact  that 
no  truths  avail  to  alter.  War  is  the  primary  politics  of  everything  that  lives,  and 
so  much  so  that  in  the  deeps  battle  and  life  are  one,  and  being  and  will-to-battle 
expire  together.  Old  Germanic  words  for  this,  like  and 

mean  seriousness  and  destiny  in  contrast  to  jest  and  play  — and  the  contrast  is 
one  of  intensity,  not  of  qualitative  difference.  And  even  though  all  high 
politics  tries  to  be  a substitution  of  more  intellectual  weapons  for  the  sword  and 
though  it  is  the  ambition  of  the  statesman  at  the  culminations  of  all  the  Cultures 
to  feel  able  to  dispense  with  war,  yet  the  primary  relationship  between  diplo- 
macy and  the  war-art  endures.  The  character  of  battle  is  common  to  both, 
and  the  tactics  and  stratagems,  and  the  necessity  of  material  forces  in  the 
background  to  give  weight  to  the  operations.  The  aim,  too,  remains  the  same 
— namely,  the  growth  of  one’s  own  life-unit  (class  or  nation)  at  the  cost  of  the 
other’s.  And  every  attempt  to  eliminate  the  “race”  element  only  leads  to  its 
transfer  to  other  ground;  instead  of  the  conflict  of  states  we  have  that  of 

ip,36i. 

* P*  ii6  and  339. 

® P.  363. 


■PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  ' 441 

parties,  or  that  of  areas,  or  (if  there  also  the  will  to  growth  is  extinct)  that  of 
the  adventurers’  retinues,  to  whose  doings  the  rest  of  the  population  unresist-^ 
ingly  adjusts  itself. 

In  every  war  between  life-powers  the  question  at  issue  is  which  is  to  govern 
the  whole.  It  is  always  a life,  never  a system,  law,  or  program  that  gives  the 
beat  in  the  stream  of  happening.^  To  be  the  centre  of  action  and  effective  focus 
of  a multitude,^  to  make  the  inward  form  of  one’s  own  personality  into  that 
of  whole  peoples  and  periods,  to  be  history’s  commanding  officer,  with  the 
aim  of  bringing  one’s  own  people  or  family  or  purposes  to  the  top  of  events  — 
that  is  the  scarce-conscious  but  irresistible  impulse  in  every  individual  being 
that  has  a historical  vocation  in  it.  There  is  only  personal  history,  and  con- 
sequently only  personal  politics.  The  struggle  of,  not  principles  but  men,  not 
ideals  but  race-qualities,  for  executive  power  is  the  alpha  and  omega.  Even 
revolutions  are  no  exception,  for  the  "sovereignty  of  the  people”  only  ex- 
presses the  fact  that  the  ruling  power  has  assumed  the  title  of  people’s  leader 
instead  of  that  of  king.  The  method  of  governing  is  scarcely  altered  thereby, 
and  the  position  of  the  governed  not  at  all.  And  even  world-peace,  in  every 
case  where  it  has  existed,  has  been  nothing  but  the  slavery  of  an  entire  humanity 
under  the  regimen  imposed  by  a few  strong  natures  determined  to  rule. 

The  conception  of  executive  power  implies  that  the  life-unit  — even  in  the 
case  of  the  animals  — is  subdivided  into  subjects  and  objects  of  government. 
This  is  so  self-evident  that  no  mass-unit  has  ever  for  a moment,  even  in  the 
severest  crises  (such  as  1789),  lost  the  sense  of  this  inner  structure  of  itself. 
Only  the  incumbent  vanishes,  not  the  office,  and  if  a people  does  actually,  in 
the  tide  of  events,  lose  all  leadership  and  float  on  haphazard,  it  only  means  that 
control  has  passed  to  outside  hands,  that  it  has  become  if?  its  entirety  the  mere 
object. 

Politically  gifted  peoples  do  not  exist.  Those  which  are  supposed  to  be 
so  are  simply  peoples  that  are  firmly  in  the  hands  of  a ruling  minority  and  in 
consequence  feel  themselves  to  be  in  good  form.  The  English  as  a people  are 
just  as  unthinking,  narrow,  and  unpractical  in  political  matters  as  any  other 
nation,  but  they  possess  — for  all  their  liking  for  public  debate  — a tradition  of 
confidence.  The  difference  is  simply  that  the  Englishman  is  the  object  of  a 
regimen  of  very  old  and  successful  habits,  in  which  he  acquiesces  because  ex- 
perience has  shown  him  their  advantage.  From  an  acquiescence  that  has  the 
outward  appearance  of  agreement,  it  is  only  one  step  to  the  conviction  that  this 
government  depends  upon  his  will,  although  paradoxically  it  is  the  government 
that,  for  technical  reasons  of  its  own,  unceasingly  hammers  the  notion  into 
his  head.  The  ruling  class  in  England  has  developed  its  aims  and  methods 

^ This  is  what  is  expressed  in  the  English  proverb:  “Men,  not  measures,”  which  is  the  very 
key  to  the  secrets  of  all  political  achievement. 

® Pp.  18  and  364. 


44X  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

quite  independently  of  the  ‘‘people/’  and  it  works  with  and  within  an  unwritten 
constitution  of  which  the  refinements  — which  have  arisen  from  practice  and 
are  wholly  innocent  of  theory  — are  to  the  uninitiated  as  opaque  as  they  ate 
unintelligible.  But  the  courage  of  a troop  depends  on  its  confidence  in  the 
leadership,  and  confidence  means  involuntary  abstention  from  criticism.  It  is 
the  officer  who  makes  cowards  into  heroes,  or  heroes  into  cowards,  and  this 
holds  good  equally  for  armies,  peoples,  classes,  and  parties.  ’Political  talent  in  a 
people  is  nothing  but  confidence  in  its  leading.  But  that  confidence  has  to  be 
acquired;  it  will  ripen  only  in  its  own  good  time,  and  success  will  stabilize  it 
and  make  it  into  a tradition.  What  appears  as  a lack  of  the  feeling  of  certainty 
in  the  ruled  is  really  lack  of  leadership-talent  in  the  ruling  classes,  which 
generates  that  sort  of  uninstinctive  and  meddlesome  criticism  which  by  its 
very  existence  shows  that  a people  has  got  “out  of  condition.” 

n 

How  is  politics  done?  The  born  statesman  is  above  all  a valuer  — a valuer  of 
men,  situations,  and  things.  He  has  the  “eye’’  which  unhesitatingly  and 
inflexibly  embraces  the  round  of  possibilities.  The  judge  of  horses  takes  in  an 
animal  with  one  glance  and  knows  what  prospects  it  will  have  in  a race.  To 
do  the  correct  thing  without  “knowing”  it,  to  have  the  hands  that  imper- 
ceptibly tighten  or  case  the  bit  — his  talent  is  the  very  opposite  to  that  of  the 
man  of  theory.  The  secret  pulse  of  all  being  is  one  and  the  same  in  him  and  in 
the  things  of  history.  They  sense  one  another,  they  exist  for  one  another. 
The  fact-man  is  immune  from  the  risk  of  practising  sentimental  or  pro- 
gram politics.  He  does  not  believe  in  the  big  words.  Pilate’s  question  is 
constantly  on  his  lips  — truths?  The  born  statesman  stands  beyond  true  and 
false.  He  does  not  confuse  the  logic  of  events  with  the  logic  of  systems. 
“Truths”  or  “errors”  — which  here  amount  to  the  same  — only  concern  him 
as  intellectual  currents,  and  in  respect  of  workings.  He  surveys  their  potency, 
durability,  and  direction,  and  duly  books  them  in  his  calculations  for  the 
destiny  of  the  power  that  he  directs.  He  has  convictions,  certainly,  that  are 
dear  to  him,  but  he  has  them  as  a private  person;  no  real  politician  ever  felt 
himself  tied  to  them  when  in  action.  “The  doer  is  always  conscienceless;  no 
one  has  a conscience  except  the  spectator,”  said  Goethe,  and  it  is  equally  true 
of  Sulla  and  Robespierre  as  it  is  of  Bismarck  and  Pitt.  The  great  Popes  and  the 
English  party-leaders,  so  long  as  they  had  still  to  strive  for  the  mastery  of 
things,  acted  on  the  same  principles  as  the  conquerors  and  upstarts  of  all  ages. 
Take  the  dealings  of  Innocent  III,  who  very  nearly  succeeded  in  creating  a 
world-dominion  of  the  Church,  and  deduce  therefrom  the  catechism  of  success; 
it  will  be  found  to  be  in  the  extremest  contradiction  with  all  religious  moral. 
Yet  without  it  there  could  have  been  no  bearable  existence  for  any  Church,  not 
to  mention  English  Colonics,  American  fortunes,  victorious  revolutions,  or, 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  443 

for  that  matter,  states  or  parties  or  peoples  in  general.  It  is  life,  not  the  m- 
dividual,  that  is  conscienceless. 

The  essential,  therefore,  is  to  understand  the  time  for  which  one  is  born. 
He  who  does  not  sense  and  understand  its  most  secret  forces,  who  does  not  feel 
in  himself  something  cognate  that  drives  him  forward  on  a path  neither  hedged 
nor  defined  by  concepts,  who  believes  in  the  surface,  public  opinion,  large 
phrases  and  ideals  of  the  day  — he  is  not  of  the  stature  for  its  events.  He  is 
in  their  power,  not  they  in  his.  Look  not  back  to  the  past  for  measuring-rods! 
Still  less  sideways  for  some  system  or  other!  There  are  times,  like  our  own 
present  and  the  Gracchan  age,  in  which  there  are  two  most  deadly  kinds  of 
idealism,  the  reactionary  and  the  democratic.  The  one  believes  in  the  reversi- 
bility of  history,  the  other  in  a teleology  of  history.  But  it  makes  no  difference 
to  the  inevitable  failure  with  which  both  burden  a nation  over  whose  destiny 
they  have  power,  whether  it  is  to  a memory  or  to  a concept  that  they  sacrifice  it. 
The  genuine  statesman  is  incarnate  history,  its  directedness  expressed  as  indi- 
vidual will  and  its  organic  logic  as  character. 

But  the  true  statesman  must  also  be,  in  a large  sense  of  the  word,  an  edu- 
cator— -not  the  representative  of  a moral  or  a doctrine,  but  an  exemplar  in 
doing.^  It  is  a patent  fact  that  a religion  has  never  yet  altered  the  style  of  an 
existence.  It  penetrated  the  waking-consciousness,  the  intellectual  man,  it 
threw  new  light  on  another  world,  it  created  an  immense  happiness  by  way  of 
humanity,  resignation,  and  patience  unto  death,  but  over  the  forces  of  life  it 
possessed  no  power.  In  the  sphere  of  the  living  only  the  great  personality  — 
the  ‘Tt,’*  the  race,  the  cosmic  force  bound  up  in  that  personality  — has  been 
creative  (not  shaping,  but  breeding  and  training)  and  has  effectively  modified 
the  type  of  entire  classes  and  peoples.  It  is  not  “the"  truth  or  “the"  good  or 
"the"  upright,  but  “the"  Roman  or  “the"  Puritan  or  “the"  Prussian  that  is  a 
fact.  The  sum  of  honour  and  duty,  discipline,  resolution,  is  a thing  not  learned 
from  books,  but  awakened  in  the  stream  of  being  by  a living  exemplar;  and  that 
is  why  Frederick  William  I was  one  of  those  educators,  great  for  all  time, 
whose  personal  race-forming  conduct  does  not  vanish  in  the  course  of  the 
generations.  The  genuine  statesman  is  distinguished  from  the  “mere  poli- 
tician"’ — the  player  who  plays  for  the  pleasure  of  the  game,  the  arriviste 
on  the  heights  of  history,  the  seeker  after  wealth  and  rank  — as  also  from  the 
schoolmaster  of  an  ideal,  by  the  fact  that  he  dares  to  demand  sacrifices  — emd 
obtains  them,  because  his  feeling  that  he  is  necessary  to  the  time  and  the  nation 
is  shared  by  thousands,  transforms  them  to  the  core,  and  renders  them  capable 
of  deeds  to  which  otherwise  they  could  never  have  risen.^  . 

^ See  p.  341. 

® The  same,  too,  holds  good  of  the  Churches,  which  arc  different  in  kind  from  the  Religion  — 
namely,  elements  of  the  world  of  facts  and,  therefore,  political  and  not  religious  in  the  type  of  their 
leadership.  It  was  not  the  Christian  evangel,  but  the  Christian  martyr,  who  conquered  the  world, 
and  that  which  gave  him  his  strength  was  not  the  doctrine,  but  the  example,  of  the  Man  on  the 
Cross. 


444  ' the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

Highest  of  all,  however,  is  not  action,  but  the  ability  to  command.  It  is  this 
that  takes  the  individual  up  out  of  himself  and  makes  him  the  centre  of  a world 
of  action.  There  is  one  kind  of  commanding  that  makes  obedience  a proud,  free, 
and  noble  habit.  That  kind  Napoleon,  for  example,  did  not  possess.  A residue 
of  subaltern  outlook  in  him  prevented  him  from  training  men  to  be  men  and  not 
bureau-personnel,  and  led  him  to  govern  through  edicts  instead  of  through 
personalities;  as  he  did  not  understand  this  subtlest  tact  of  command  and,  there- 
fore, was  obliged  to  do  everything  really  decisive  himself,  he  slowly  collapsed 
from  inability  to  reconcile  the  demands  of  his  position  with  the  limit  of  human 
capabilities.  But  one  who,  like  Cassar  or  Frederick  the  Great,  possesses  this  last 
and  highest  gift  of  complete  humanity  feels  — on  a battle-evening  when 
operations  are  sweeping  to  the  willed  conclusion,  and  the  victory  is  turning 
out  to  be  conclusive  of  the  campaign;  or  when  the  last  signature  is  written  that 
rounds  off  a historical  epoch  — a wondrous  sense  of  power  that  the  man  of 
truths  can  never  know.  There  are  moments  — and  they  indicate  the  maxima 
of  cosmic  flowings  — when  the  individual  feels  himself  to  be  identical  with 
Destiny,  the  centre  of  the  world,  and  his  own  personality  seems  to  him  almost 
as  a covering  in  which  the  history  of  the  future  is  about  to  clothe  itself. 

The  first  problem  is  to  make  oneself  somebody;  the  second  — less  obvious, 
but  harder  and  greater  in  its  ultimate  effects  — to  create  a tradition^  to  bring  on 
others  so  that  one's  work  may  be  continued  with  one's  own  pulse  and  spirit, 
to  release  a current  of  like  activity  that  does  not  need  the  original  leader  to 
maintain  it  in  form.  And  here  the  statesman  rises  to  something  that  in  the 
Classical  world  would  doubtless  have  been  called  divinity.  He  becomes  the 
creator  of  a new  life,  the  spirit-mccstor  of  a young  race.  He  himself,  as  a unit, 
vanishes  from  the  stream  after  a few  years.  But  a minority  called  into  being  by 
him  takes  up  his  course  and  maintains  it  indefinitely.  This  cosmic  something, 
this  soul  of  a ruling  stratum,  an  individual  can  generate  and  leave  as  a heritage, 
and  throughout  history  it  is  this  that  has  produced  the  durable  effects.  The 
great  statesman  is  rare.  Whether  he  comes,  or  wins  through,  too  soon  or  too 
late,  incident  determines.  Great  individuals  often  destroy  more  than  they  have 
built  up  — by  the  gap  that  their  death  makes  in  the  flow  of  happening.  But 
the  creation  of  tradition  means  the  elimination  of  the  incident,  A tradition  breeds  a 
high  average,  with  which  the  future  can  reckon  — no  Cassar,  but  a Senate,  no 
Napoleon,  but  an  incomparable  officer-corps.  A strong  tradition  attracts 
talents  from  all  quarters,  and  out  of  small  gifts  produces  great  results.  The 
schools  of  painting  of  Italy  and  Holland  arc  proof  of  this,  no  less  than  the 
Prussian  army  and  the  diplomacy  of  the  Roman  Curia.  It  was  the  great  flaw  in 
Bismarck,  as  compared  with  Frederick  William  I,  that  he  could  achieve,  but 
could  not  form  a tradition;  that  he  did  not  parallel  Moltke's  officer-corps  by  a 
corresponding  race  of  politicians  who  would  identify  themselves  in  feeling 
with  his  State  and  its  new  tasks,  would  constantly  take  up  good  men  from  below 


,445 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS 

md  so  provide  for  the  continuance  of  the  Bismarckian  action-pulse  for  ever. 
If  this  creation  of  a tradition  does  not  come  off,  then  instead  of  a homogeneous 
ruling  stratum  m^e  have  a congeries  of  heads  that  are  helpless  when  confronted 
by  ^^he  unforeseen.  If  it  does,  we  have  a Sovereign  People  in  the  one  sense  of  the 
phrase  that  is  worthy  of  a people  and  possible  in  the  world  of  fact  — a highly 
trained,  self-replenishing  minority  with  sure  and  slowly  ripened  traditions, 
which  attracts  every  talent  into  the  charmed  circle  and  uses  it  to  the  full,  and 
ipso  facto  keeps  itself  in  harmony  with  the  remainder  of  the  nation  that  it  rules. 
Such  a minority  slowly  develops  into  a true  “breed,”  even  when  it  had  begun 
merely  as  a party,  and  the  sureness  of  its  decisions  comes  to  be  that  of  blood, 
not  of  reason.  But  this  means  that  what  happens  in  it  happens  “of  itself”  and 
does  not  need  the  Genius.  Great  politics^  so  to  put  it,  takes  the  place  of  the  great 
politician. 

What,  then,  ir  politics?  It  is  the  art  of  the  possible — an  old  saying,  and 
almost  an  all-inclusive  saying.  The  gardener  can  o-btain  a plant  from  the  seed, 
or  he  can  improve  its  stock.  He  can  bring  to  bloom,  or  let  languish,  the  dis- 
positions hidden  in  it,  its  growths  and  colour,  its  flower  and  fruit.  On  his 
eye  for  possibilities  — and,  therefore,  necessities  — depends  its  fulfilment,  its 
strength,  its  whole  Destiny.  But  the  basic  form  and  direction  of  its  being,  the 
stages  and  tempo  and  direction  thereof,  are  not  in  his  power.  It  must  accomplish 
them  or  it  decays,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  immense  plant  that  we  call  a 
“Culture”  and  the  being-streams  of  human  families  that  are  bound  up  in  its 
form-world.  The  great  statesman  is  the  gardener  of  a people. 

Every  doer  is  born  in  a time  and  for  a time,  and  thereby  the  ambit  of  his 
attainable  achievement  is  fixed.  For  his  grandfather,  for  his  grandson,  the 
data,  and  therefore  the  task  and  the  object,  are  not  the  same.  The  circle  is 
further  narrowed  by  the  limits  of  his  personality,  the  properties  of  his  people, 
the  situation,  and  the  men  with  whom  he  has  to  work.  It  is  the  hall-mark  of 
the  high  politician  that  he  is  rarely  caught  out  in  a misappreciation  of  this 
limit,  and  equally  rarely  overlooks  anything  realiizable  within  it.  With  this  — 
one  cannot  too  often  repeat,  especially  to  Germans  — goes  a sure  discrimination 
between  what  “ought”  to  be  and  what  will  be.  The  basic  forms  of  the  state 
and  of  political  life,  the  direction  and  the  degree  of  their  evolution,  are  given 
values  unalterably  dependent  on  the  given  time.  They  are  the  track  of  political 
success  and  not  its  goal.  On  the  other  hand  the  worshippers  of  political  ideals 
create  out  of  nothing.  Their  intellectual  freedom  is  astounding,  but  their  castles 
of  the  mind,  built  of  airy  concepts  like  wisdom  and  righteousness,  liberty  and 
equality,  are  in  the  end  all  the  same;  they  are  built  from  the  top  storey  down- 
wards. The  master  of  fact,  for  his  part,  is  content  to  direct  imperceptibly  that 
which  he  sees  and  accepts  as  plain  reality.  This  does  not  seem  very  much,  yet  it 
is  the  very  starting-point  of  freedom,  in  a grand  sense  of  the  word.  The  knack 
lies  in  the  little  things,  the  last  careful  touch  of  the  helm,  the  fine  sensing  of  the 


446"  ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

most  delicate  oscillations  of  collective  and  individual  souls.  The  art  of  the 
statesman  consists  not  only  in  a clear  idea  of  the  main  lines  drawn  undeviably 
before  him,  but  also  in  the  sure  handling  of  the  single  occurrences  and  the  single 
persons,  encountered  along  those  lines,  which  can  turn  an  impending  disaster 
into  a decisive  success.  The  secret  of  all  victory  lies  in  the  organization  of  the 
non-obvious.  An  adept  in  the  game  can,  like  Talleyrand,  go  to  Vienna  as 
ambassador  of  the  vanquished  party  and  make  himself  master  of  the  victor. 
At  the  Lucca  meeting,  Csesar,  whose  position  was  wellnigh  desperate,  not  only 
made  Pompey’s  power  serviceable  to  his  own  ends,  but  undermined  it  at  the 
same  time,  and  without  his  opponent’s  becoming  aware  of  the  fact.  But  the 
domain  of  the  possible  has  dangerous  edges,  and  if  the  finished  tact  of  the  great 
Baroque  diplomatists  almost  always  managed  to  keep  clear,  it  is  the  very 
privilege  of  the  ideologues  to  be  always  stumbling  over  it.  There  have  been 
turns  in  history  in  which  the  statescraftman  has  let  himself  drift  with  the 
current  awhile,  in  order  not  to  lose  the  leadership.  Every  situation  has  its 
elastic  limit,  and  in  the  estimation  of  that  limit  not  the  smallest  error  is  per- 
missible. A revolution  that  reaches  explosion-point  is  always  a proof  of  lack 
of  the  political  pulse  in  the  governors  and  in  their  opponents. 

Further,  the  necessary  must  be  done  opportunely  — namely,  while  it  is  a 
present  wherewith  the  governing  power  can  buy  confidence  in  itself,  whereas 
if  it  has  to  be  conceded  as  a sacrifice,  it  discloses  a weakness  and  excites  con- 
tempt. Political  forms  are  living  forms  whose  changes  inexorably  follow  a 
definite  direction,  and  to  attempt  to  prevent  this  course  or  to  divert  it  towards 
some  ideal  is  to  confess  oneself  “out  of  condition.’*  The  Roman  nobility 
possessed  this  congruence  of  pulse,  the  Spartan  did  not.  In  the  period  of  mount- 
ing democracy  we  find  again  and  again  (as  in  France  before  1789  and  Germany 
before  1918)  the  arrival  of  a fatal  moment  when  it  is  too  late  for  the  necessary 
reform  to  be  given  as  a free  gift;  then  that  which  should  be  refused  with  the 
sternest  energy  is  given  as  sacrifice,  and  so  becomes  the  sign  of  dissolution.  But 
those  who  fail  to  detect  the  first  necessity  in  good  time  will  all  the  more  cer- 
tainly fail  to  misunderstand  the  second  situation.  Even  a journey  to  Canossa 
can  be  made  too  soon  or  too  late  — the  timing  may  settle  the  future  of  whole 
peoples,  whether  they  shall  be  Destiny  for  others,  or  themselves  the  objects  of 
another’s  Destiny.  But  the  declining  democracy  also  repeats  the  same  error  of 
trying  to  hold  what  was  the  ideal  of  yesterday.  This  is  the  danger  of  our 
twentieth  century.  On  the  path  towards  Cassarism  there  is  ever  a Cato  to  be 
■jfbund.,/,' 

The  influence  that  a statesman  — even  one  in  an  exceptionally  strong  po- 
sition — possesses  over  the  methods  of  politics  is  very  small,  and  it  is  one  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  high-grade  statesman  that  he  does  not  deceive  himself  on 
this  matter.  His  task  is  to  work  in  and  with  the  historical  form  that  he  finds 
in  existence;  it  is  only  the  theorist  who  enthusiastically  searches  for  more 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  447 

ideal  forms.  But  to  be  politically  ‘‘in  form**  means  necessarily,  amongst  other 
things,  an  unconditional  command  of  the  most  modem  means.  There  is  no  choice 
about  it.  The  means  and  methods  are  premisses  pertaining  to  the  time  and  be- 
long to  the  inner  form  of  the  time  — and  one  who  grasps  at  the  inapposite,  who 
permits  his  taste  or  his  feelings  to  overpower  the  pulse  in  him,  loses  at  once  his 
grip  of  realities.  The  danger  of  an  aristocracy  is  that  of  being  conservative  in 
its  means,  the  danger  of  a democracy  is  the  confusion  of  formula  and  form. 
The  means  of  the  present  are,  and  will  be  for  many  years,  parliamentary  — 
elections  and  the  press.  He  may  think  what  he  pleases  about  them,  he  may 
respect  them  or  despise  them,  but  he  must  command  them,  Bach  and  Mozart 
commanded  the  musical  means  of  their  times.  This  is  the  hall-mark  of  mastery 
in  any  and  every  field,  and  statecraft  is  no  exception.  Now,  the  publicly 
visible  outer  form  thereof  is  not  the  essential  but  merely  the  disguise,  and  con- 
sequently it  may  be  altered,  rationalized,  and  brought  down  to  constitutional 
texts  — without  its  actualities  being  necessarily  affected  in  the  slightest  — 
and  hence  the  ambitions  of  all  revolutionaries  expend  themselves  in  playing 
the  game  of  rights,  principles,  and  franchises  on  the  surface  of  history.  But  the 
statesman  knows  that  the  extension  of  a franchise  is  quite  unimportant  in 
comparison  with  the  technique  — Athenian  or  Roman,  Jacobin  or  American  or 
present-day  German  — oi  oprating  the  votes.  How  the  English  constitution 
reads  is  a matter  of  small  import  compared  with  the  fact  that  it  is  managed  by  a 
small  stratum  of  high  families,  so  that  an  Edward  VII  is  simply  a minister  of  his 
Ministry.  And  as  for  the  modern  Press,  the  sentimentalist  may  beam  with 
contentment  when  it  is  constitutionally  “free**  — but  the  realist  merely  asks 
at  whose  disposal  it  is. 

Politics,  lastly,  is  the  form  in  which  is  accomplished  the  history  of  a nation 
within  a plurality  of  nations.  The  great  art  is  to  maintain  one’s  own  nation 
inwardly  “inform**  for  events  outside;  this  is  the  natural  relation  of  home 
and  foreign  politics,  holding  not  only  for  Peoples  and  States  and  Estates,  but 
for  living  units  of  every  kind,  down  to  the  simplest  animal  swarms  and  down 
into  the  individual  bodies.  And,  as  between  the  two,  the  first  exists  exclusively 
for  the  second  and  not  vice  versa.  The  true  democrat  is  accustomed  to  treat  home 
politics  as  an  end  in  itself;  the  rank  and  file  of  diplomats  think  solely  of  foreign 
affairs;  but  just  because  of  this  the  individual  successes  of  either  “cut  no  ice.” 
No  doubt,  the  political  master  exhibits  his  powers  most  obviously  in  the  tactics 
of  home  reform;  in  his  economic  and  social  activities;  in  his  cleverness  in 
maintaining  the  public  form  of  the  whole,  the  “rights  and  liberties,**  both  in 
tune  with  the  tastes  of  the  period  and  at  the  same  time  effective;  and  in  the  educa- 
tion of  the  feelings  without  which  it  is  impossible  for  a people  to  be  “in 
condition*’  — namely,  trust,  respect  for  the  leading,  consciousness  of  power,  con- 
tentment, and  (when  necessary)  enthusiasm.  But  the  value  of  all  this  depends 
upon  its  relation  to  this  basic  fact  of  higher  history  — that  a people  is  not  alone 


448  THE  , DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST  , 

in  the  world,  and  that  itsiuture  will  be  decided  by  its  force-relationships  towards 
other  peoples  and  powers  and  not  by  its  mere  internal  ordering.  And,  since  the 
ordinary  man  is  not  so  long-sighted,  it  is  the  ruling  minority  that  must  possess 
this  quality  on  behalf  of  the  rest,  and  not  unless  there  is  such  a minority  does  the 
statesman  find  the  instrument  wherewith  he  can  carry  his  purposes  into  effect.^ 

Ill 

In  the  early  politics  of  all  Cultures  the  governing  powers  are  pre-established 
and  unquestioned.  The  whole  being  is  strictly  in  patriarchal  and  symbolic 
form.  The  connexions  with  the  mother  soil  are  so  strong,  the  feudal  tie,  and 
even  its  successor  the  aristocratic  state,  so  self-evident  to  the  life  held  in  their 
spell,  that  politics  in  a Homeric  or  Gothic  age  is  limited  to  plain  action 
within  the  cadre  of  the  given  forms.  In  so  far  as  these  forms  change,  they  do 
so  more  or  less  spontaneously,  and  the  idea  that  it  is  a task  of  politics  to  bring 
about  the  changes  never  definitely  emerges  into  anyone’s  mind,  even  if  a king- 
dom be  overthrown  or  a nobility  reduced  to  subjection.  There  is  only  class- 
politics,  Imperial-  or  Papal-  or  vassal-politics.  Blood  and  race  speak  in  actions 
undertaken  instinctively  or  half-consciously  — even  the  priest  behaves, 
politician,  as  the  man  of  race.  The  ‘‘  problems’*  of  the  State  are  not  yet  awak- 
ened. The  sovereignty,  the  primary  orders,  the  entire  early  form-world,  are 
God-given,  and  it  is  on  them  as  premisses,  not  about  them  as  objects  of  dispute, 
that  the  organic  minorities  fight  their  battles.  These  minorities  we  call 

It  is  of  the  essence  of  the  Faction  that  it  is  wholly  inaccessible  to  the  idea 
that  the  order  of  things  can  be  changed  to  a plan.  Its  object  is  to  win  for  itself 
status,  power,  or  possessions  within  this  order  — like  all  growing  things  in  a 
growing  world.  There  are  groups  in  which  relationships  of  houses,  honour 
and  loyalty,  bonds  of  union  of  almost  mythic  inwardness,  play  a part,  and 
from  which  abstract  ideas  are  totally  excluded.  Such  were  the  factions  of  the 
Homeric  and  Gothic  periods,  Telemachus  and  the  suitors  in  Ithaca,  the  Blues 
and  Greens  under  Justinian,  the  Guclphs  and  Ghibellines,  the  Houses  of  Lan- 
caster and  York,  the  Protestants,^  the  Huguenots,  and  even  later  the  motive 
forces  of  Fronde  and  First  Tyrannis.  Machiavelli’s^^^^b  rests  entirely  on  this 
spirit. 

The  change  sets  in  as  soon  as,  with  the  great  city,  the  Non-Estate,  the 
bourgeoisie,  takes  over  the  leading  rdle,^  Now  it  is  the  reverse,  the  political 
form  becomes  the  object  of  conflict,  the  problem.  Heretofore  it  was  ripened, 

^ It  should  scarcely  need  to  be  emphasized  that  this  is  the  basic  principle,  not  of  an  aristocratic 
regime,  but  of  government  itself.  Cleon,  Robespierre,  henin,  every  gifted  mass-leader,  has  treated 
his  office  thus.  Anyone  who  genuinely  felt  himself  as  the  delegate  of  the  multitude,  instead  of  as  the 
regent  of  such  as  do  not  know  what  they  want,  would  not  remain  master  of  his  house  for  one  day. 
The  only  question  is  whether  the  great  popular  leaders  apply  their  powers  for  their  own  benefit  or  for 
that  of  others;  and  on  that  much  might  be  said. 

2 Originally  an  assembly  of  nineteen  princes  and  free  cities  (1519).  ^ See  pp.  355,  3 9S,  et  seq. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  449' 

now  it  mnst  needs  be  shaped.  Politics  becomes  awake,  not  mcrelj  compre- 
hended, but  reduced  to  comprehensible  ideas.  The  powers  of  intellect  and 
money  set  themselves  up  against  blood  and  tradition.  In  place  of  the  organic 
we  have  the  organized;  in  ^lace  of  the  Estate,  the  Party.  A party  is  not  a growth 
of  race,  but  an  aggregate  of  heads,  and  therefore  as  superior  to  the  old  es- 
tates in  intellect  as  it  is  poorer  in  instinct.  It  is  the  mortal  enemy  of  naturally 
matured  class-ordering,  the  mere  existence  of  which  is  in  contradiction  with 
its  essence.  Consequently,  the  notion  of  party  is  always  bound  up  with  the 
unreservedly  negative,  disruptive,  and  socially  levelling  notion  oi  equality. 
Noble  ideals  are  no  longer  recognized,  but  only  vocational  interests.^  It  is 
the  same  with  the  freedom-idea,  which  is  likewise  a negative.^  Parties  are 
a purely  urban  phenomenon.  With  the  emancipation  of  the  city  from  the  country, 
everywhere  (whether  we  happen  to  know  it  evidentially  or  not)  Estate  politics 
gives  way  to  party  politics  — in  Egypt  at  the  end  of  the  Middle  Kingdom,  in 
China  with  the  Contending  States,  in  Baghdad  and  Byzantium  with  the  Ab- 
bassid  period.  In  the  capitals  of  the  West  the  parties  form  in  the  parliamentary 
style,  in  the  city-states  of  the  Classical  they  are  forum-parties,  and  we  recognize 
parties  of  the  Magian  style  in  the  Mavali  and  the  monks  of  Theodore  of  Stu- 
dion.^ 

But  always  it  is  the  Non-Estate,  the  unit  of  protest  against  the  essence  of 
Estate,  whose  leading  minority — “educated**  and  “well-to-do**  — comes 
forward  as  a party  with  a program,  consisting  of  aims  that  are  not  felt  but 
defined,  and  of  the  rejection  of  everything  that  cannot  be  rationally  grasped. 
At  bottom,  therefore,  there  is  only  one  party,  that  of  the  bourgeoisie,  the  liberal,  and 
it  is  perfectly  conscious  of  its  position  as  such.  It  looks  on  itself  as  coextensive 
with  “the  people.**  Its  opponents  (above  all,  the  genuine  Estates  namely, 
“squire  and  parson*’)  are  enemies  and  traitors  to  “the people,**  and  its  opinions 
are  the  “voice  of  the  people**  — which  is  inoculated  by  all  the  expedients  of 
party-political  nursing,  oratory  in  the  Forum,  press  in  the  West,  until  these 
opinions  do  fairly  represent  it. 

The  prime  Estates  are  nobility  and  priesthood.  The  prime  Party  is  that 
of  money  and  mind,  the  liberal,  the  megalopolitan.  Herein  lies  the  profound 
justification,  in  all  Cultures,  of  the  ideas  of  Aristocracy  and  Democracy.  Aristoc- 
racy despises  the  mind  of  the  cities.  Democracy  despises  the  boor  and  hates 
the  countryside.^  It  is  the  difference  between  Estate  politics  and  party  politics, 

^ Hence  it  is  that  on  the  soil  of  burgher  equality  the  possession  of  money  immediately  takes  the 
place  of  genealogical  rank. 

2 See  p.  354. 

® Pp.  4x4,  et  scq.  p^mparc  also  Wcllhauscn,  Die  relig.~pUt.  Oppsitionsparteien  im  alten  Islam 

^ It  is  an  important  factor  in  the  democracy  of  England  and  America  that  in  the  first  the  yeomanry 
had  died  out  and  in  the  second  has  never  existed.  The  “farmer”  is  spiritually  a suburban  and  in 
practice  carries  on  his  farming  as  an  industry.  Instead  of  villages,  there  are  only  fragments  of  meg- 
alopolis. 


450  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

class'-conscioiisness  and  party  inclination,  race  and  intellect,  growth  and 
construction.  Aristocracy  in  the  completed  Culture,  and  Democracy  in  the 
incipient  cosmopolitan  Civilization,  stand  opposed  till  both  are  submerged  in 
Caesarism.  As  surely  as  the  nobility  is  the  Estate  (and  the  Tiers  Etat  never  man- 
ages to  get  itself  into  real  form  in  this  fashion),  so  surely  the  nobility  fails 
to  feel  as  a party,  though  it  may  organize  itself  as  one. 

It  has  in  fact  no  choice  but  to  do  so.  All  modern  constitutions  repudiate  the 
Estates  and  are  built  on  the  Party  as  self-evidently  the  basic  form  of  politics. 
The  nineteenth  century  — correspondingly,  therefore,  the  third  century  b.c.  — 
is  the  heyday  of  party  politics.  Its  democratic  character  compels  the  formation 
counter-parties,  and  whereas  formerly,  as  late  even  as  the  eighteenth  century, 
the  “Tiers”  constituted  itself  in  imitation  of  the  nobility  as  an  Estate,  now  there 
arises  the  defensive  figure  of  the  Conservative  party,  copied  from  the  Liberal,^ 
dominated  completely  by  the  latter’s  forms,  bourgeois-ized  without  being 
bourgeois,  and  obliged  to  fight  with  rules  and  methods  that  liberalism  has 
laid  down.  It  has  the  choice  of  handling  these  means  better  than  its  adversary  ^ 
or  of  perishing;  but  it  is  of  the  intimate  structure  of  an  Estate  that  it  does  not 
understand  the  situation  and  challenges  the  form  instead  of  the  foe,  and  is  thus 
involved  in  that  use  of  extreme  methods  which  we  see  dominating  the  inner 
politics  of  whole  states  in  the  early  phases  of  every  Civilization,  and  delivering 
them  helpless  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  compulsion  that  there  is  upon 
every  party  to  be  bourgeois,  at  any  rate  in  appearance,  turns  to  sheer  carica- 
ture when  below  the  bourgeoisie  of  education  and  possessions  the  Residue  also 
organizes  itself  as  a party.  Marxism,  for  example,  is  in  theory  a negation  of 
bourgeoisie,  but  as  a party  it  is  in  attitude  and  leadership  essentially  middle- 
class.  There  is  a continuous  conflict  between  its  will  — ■ which  necessarily 
steps  outside  the  bounds  of  party  politics  and  therefore  of  constitutionalism 
(both  being  exclusively  liberal  phenomena),  and  can  in  honesty  only  be  called 
civil  war  — and  the  appearances  which  it  feels  obliged,  in  justice  to  itself, 
to  keep  up.  But  for  Marxism,  again,  these  appearances  are  indispensable,  at 
this  particular  period,  if  durable  success  is  to  be  attained.  A noble  party  in  a 
parliament  is  inwardly  just  as  spurious  as  a proletarian.  Only  the  bourgeoisie 
is  in  its  natural  place  there. 

In  Rome,  from  the  introduction  of  the  Tribunes,  in  471,  to  the  recognition 
of  their  legislative  omnipotence,  in  the  revolution  of  patricians  and 
plebeians  had  fought  their  fight  essentially  as  Estates,  classes.  But  thereafter 
these  opposite  terms  possessed  hardly  more  than  genealogical  significance, 
and  there  developed  instead  parties,  to  which  the  terms  liberal  and  conservative 

1 And  wherever,  as  in  Egypt,  India,  and  the  West,  there  exists  a opposition  between  the 

two  primary  Estates,  there  is  also  a clerical  party  — the  party,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Church  as  distinct 
from  religion  and  of  the  priest  as  distinct  from  the  believer. 

* And  with  its  content  of  race-strength  it  has  an  excellent  chance  of  successfully  doinff  so 

*P.409. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  431 

rcsf>cctively  may  quite  reasonably  be  applied  — namely,  the  Populus,^ supreme 
in  the  forum,  and  the  nobility,  with  its  fulcrum  in  the  Senate.  The  latter  had 
transformed  itself  (about  187)  from  a family  council  of  the  old  clans  into  a state 
council  of  the  administrative  aristocracy.  The  associations  of  the  Populus 
are  with  the  property-graded  Comitia  Centuriata  and  the  big-money  group  of 
the  Equites,  those  of  the  nobility  with  the  yeomanry  that  was  influential  in  the 
Comitia  Tributa.  Think  on  the  one  hand  of  the  Gracchi  and  Marius,  and  on 
the  other  of  C.  Flaminius,  and  a little  penetration  will  disclose  the  complete 
change  in  the  position  of  the  Consuls  and  the  Tribunes.  They  are  no  longer  the 
chosen  trustees  of  the  first  and  third  Estates,  with  lines  of  conduct  determined 
by  that  fact,  but  they  represent  party,  and  on  occasion  change  it.  There  were 
‘Vliberal’*  consuls  like  the  Elder  Cato  and  “conservative’*  Tribunes  like  the 
Octavius  who  opposed  Ti.  Gracchus.  Both  parties  put  up  candidates  at  elec- 
tions, and  used  every  sort  of  demagogic  operation  to  get  them  in  — and  when 
money  had  failed  to  win  an  election,  it  got  to  work  afterwards  with  (increasing) 
success  upon  the  person  elected. 

In  England  Tories  and  Whigs  constituted  themselves,  from  the  beginning  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  as  parties,  both  becoming  in  form  bourgeois  and  both 
taking  up  the  liberal  program  literally,  whereby  public  opinion  as  usual  was 
completely  convinced  and  set  at  rest.^  This  was  a master-stroke,  delivered  at 
the  correct  moment,  and  prevented  the  formation  of  a party  hostile  to  the 
Estate-principle  such  as  arose  in  France  in  1789.  The  members  of  the  lower 
House,  hitherto  emissaries  of  the  ruling  stratum,  became  popular  representa- 
tives, but  still  continued  to  depend  financially  upon  it.  The  leading  remained 
in  the  same  hands,  and  the  opposition  of  the  parties,  which  from  1830  assumed 
the  titles  of  Liberal  and  Conservative  almost  as  a matter  of  course,  was  always 
one  of  pluses  and  minuses,  never  of  blank  alternatives.  In  these  same  years 
the  literary  freedom-movement  of  “young  Germany”  changed  into  a party- 
movement,  and  in  America  under  Andrew  Jackson  the  National-Whig  and 
Democratic  parties  organized  themselves  as  opposites,  and  open  recognition 
was  given  to  the  principle  that  elections  were  a business,  and  state  offices  from 
top  to  bottom  the  “spoils  of  the  victors.”  ^ 

^ PMj  corresponds  to  the  “Tiers”  (burghers  and  yeomen)  of  the  eighteenth  century,  fofalus  to 
the  megalopolitan  masses  of  the  nineteenth.  The  difference  manifested  itself  in  their  respective 
attitudes  towards  the  freed  slaves,  mostly  of  non-Italian  origin.  These  the  Plebs,  as  an  order,  sought 
to  thrust  away  into  as  few  tribes  as  possible,  but  in  the  Populus  as  a party  they  very  soon  came  to  play 
the  decisive  r61e. 

^ P,  412.. 

® Simultaneously,  too,  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  quietly  changed  the  basis  of  its  politics 
from  a class  to  a party,  and  did  so  with  a strategic  sureness  that  cannot  be  too  much  admired.  In  the 
eighteenth  century  it  had  been,  as  regards  the  style  of  its  diplomacy,  the  allocation  of  its  offices 
and  the  spirit  of  its  higher  circles,  aristocratic  through  and  through.  Think  of  the  type  of  the  abbe, 
and  of  the  prince-prelates  who  became  ministers  and  ambassadors,  like  the  young  Cardinal  Rohan. 
Now,  in  the  true  liberal  fashion,  opinions  took  the  place  of  origins,  working-power  that  of  taste,  and 
the  great  weapons  of  democracy  — press,  elections,  money  — were  handled  with  a skill  that 
liberalism  proper  rarely  equalled  and  never  surpassed. 


45x'  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

But  the  form  of  the  governing  minority  develops  steadily  from  that  of  the  Estate^ 
through  that  of  the  Party,  towards  that  of  the  IndividuaV s following.  The  outward 
sign  of  the  end  of  Democracy  and  its  transition  into  Csesarism  is  not,  for 
example,  the  disappearance  of  the  party  of  the  Tiers  Etat,  the  Liberal,  but  the 
disappearance  of  party  itself  as  a form.  The  sentiments,  the  popular  aim,  the 
abstract  ideals  that  characterize  all  genuine  party  politics,  dissolve  and  are 
supplanted  by  private  politics,  the  unchecked  will-to-power  of  the  race-strong 
few.  An  Estate  has  instincts,  a party  has  a program,  but  a following  has  a 
master.  That  was  the  course  of  events  from  Patricians  and  Plebeians,  through 
Optimates  and  Populates,  to  Pompeians  and  Ciesarians.  The  period  of  real 
party  government  covers  scarcely  two  centuries,  and  in  our  own  case  is,  since 
the  World  War,  well  on  the  decline.  That  the  entire  mass  of  the  electorate, 
actuated  by  a common  impulse,  should  send  up  men  who  are  capable  of  man- 
aging their  affairs  — which  is  the  naive  assumption  in  all  constitutions  — is  a 
possibility  only  in  the  first  rush,  and  presupposes  that  not  even  the  rudiments 
of  organization  by  definite  groups  exists.  So  it  was  in  France  in  1789  and  in 
1848.  An  assembly  has  only  to  be,  and  tactical  units  will  form  at  once  within 
it,  whose  cohesion  depends  upon  the  will  to  maintain  the  dominant  position 
once  won,  and  which,  so  far  from  regarding  themselves  as  the  mouthpieces  of 
their  constituents,  set  about  making  all  the  expedients  of  agitation  amenable 
to  their  influence  and  usable  for  their  purposes.  A tendency  that  has  organized 
itself  in  the  people,  has  already  ipso  facto  become  the  tool  oi  the  organization, 
and  continues  steadily  along  the  same  path  until  the  organization  also  becomes 
in  turn  the  tool  of  the  leader.  The  will-to-power  is  stronger  than  any  theory. 
In  the  beginning  the  leading  and  the  apparatus  come  into  existence  for  the  sake 
of  the  program.  Then  they  are  held  on  to  defensively  by  their  incumbents  for 
the  sake  of  power  and  booty  — as  is  already  universally  the  case  to-day,  for 
thousands  in  every  country  live  on  the  party  and  the  offices  and  functions  that 
it  distributes.  Lastly  the  program  vanishes  from  memory,  and  the  organiza- 
tion works  for  its  own  sake  alone. 

With  the  elder  Scipio  or  Quinctius  Flamininus  comradeship  on  campaign  is 
still  the  implication  when  we  speak  of  their  “friends.*’  But  the  younger  Scipio 
went  further  and  his  “Cohors  Amicorum”  was  no  doubt  the  first  example  of 
an  organized  following  whose  activity  extended  to  the  law-courts  and  the 
elections.^  In  the  same  way  the  old  purely  patriarchal  and  aristocratic  relation  of 
loyalty  between  pztton  and  client  evolved  into  a community  of  interest  based  on 
very  material  foundations,  and  even  before  Caesar  there  were  written  compacts 
between  candidates  and  electors  with  specific  provisions  as  to  payment  and 
performances.  On  the  other  side,  just  as  in  present-day  America,^  clubs  and 

^ For  what  follows  see  M.  Gelzer,  Die  l^obilitat  d.  rSm.  KepuhUk(t^i%),  pp.  43,  ct  seq.;  A.  Rosen- 
berg, pp.  6z,  ct  seq. 

® The  reputation  of  Tammany  Hall  in  New  York  is  universal,  but  the  relations  approximate  to 
this  condition  in  all  countries  ruled  by  parties.  The  American  Caucus,  which  first  distributes  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  453 

election  committees  were  formed,  which  so  controlled  or  frightened  the  mass 
of  the  electors  of  their  wards  as  to  be  able  to  do  election  business  with  the 
great  leaders,  the  pre-Cassars,  as  one  power  with  another.  Far  from  this  being 
the  shipwreck  of  democracy,  it  is  its  very  meaning  and  necessary  issue,  and  the 
lamentations  of  unworldly  idealists  over  this  destruction  of  their  hopes  only 
show  their  blind  ignorance  of  the  inexorable  duality  of  truths  and  facts  and  of 
the  intimate  linkage  of  intellect  and  money. 

Politico-social  theory  is  only  one  of  the  bases  of  party  politics,  but  it  is  a 
necessary  one.  The  proud  series  that  runs  from  Rousseau  to  Marx  has  its  anti- 
type in  the  line  of  the  Classical  Sophists  up  to  Plato  and  Zeno.  In  the  case  of 
China  the  characteristics  of  the  corresponding  doctrines  have  still  to  be  ex- 
tracted from  Confucian  and  Taoist  literature;  it  suffices  to  name  the  Socialist 
Moh-ti.  In  the  Byzantine  and  Arabian  literature  of  the  Abbassid  period- 
in  which  radicalism,  like  everything  else,  is  orthodox-religious  in  constitution 
— they  hold  a large  place,  and  they  were  driving  forces  in  all  the  crises  of  the 
ninth  century.  That  they  existed  in  Egypt  and  in  India  also  is  proved  by  the 
spirit  of  events  in  the  Hyksos  time  and  in  Buddha’s.  Literary  form  is  not 
essential  to  them  — they  are  just  as  effectively  disseminated  by  word  of 
mouth,  by  sermon  and  propaganda  in  sects  and  associations,  which  indeed  is 
the  standard  method  at  the  close  of  the  Puritan  movements  (Islam  and  Anglo- 
American  Christianity  amongst  them). 

Whether  these  doctrines  are  “true”  or  '‘false”  is  — we  must  reiterate  and 
emphasize  — a question  without  meaning  for  political  history.  The  refutation 
of,  say,  Marxism  belongs  to  the  realm  of  academic  dissertation  and  public 
debates,  in  which  everyone  is  always  right  and  his  opponent  always  wrong. 
But  whether  they  are  effective  — from  when,  and  for  how  long,  the  belief  that 
actuality  can  be  ameliorated  by  a system  of  concepts  is  a real  force  that  politics 
must  reckon  with  — that  does  matter.  We  of  to-day  find  ourselves  in  a period 
of  boundless  confidence  in  the  omnipotence  of  reason.  Great  general  ideas  of 
freedom,  justice,  humanity,  progress  are  sacrosanct.  The  great  theories  are 
gospels.  Their  power  to  convince  does  not  rest  upon  logical  premisses,  for  the 
mass  of  a party  possesses  neither  the  critical  energy  nor  the  detachment  seriously 
to  test  them,  but  upon  the  sacramental  h5^ostasis  in  their  keywords.  At  the 
same  time,  the  spell  is  limited  to  the  populations  of  the  great  cities  and  the 
period  of  Rationalism  as  the  “educated  man’s  religion.”  ^ On  a peasantry  it 
has  no  hold,  and  even  on  the  city  masses  its  effect  lasts  only  for  a certain  time. 
But/<?r  that  time  it  has  all  the  irresistibleness  of  a new  revelation.  They  are 
converted  to  it,  hang  fervently  upon  the  words  and  the  preachers  thereof,  go  to 


offices  of  State  amongst  its  members  and  then  forces  their  names  upon  the  mass-electorate,  was 
introduced  into  England  by  Joseph  Chamberlain  in  his  “National  Liberal  Federation,**  and  in 
Germany  its  advances  have  been  rapid  since  1319. 


454  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

martyrdom  on  barricades  and  battle-field  and  gallows;  their  gaze  is  set  upon  a 
political  and  social  other-world,  and  dry  sober  criticism  seems  base,  impious, 
worthy  of  death. 

But  for  this  very  reason  documents  like  the  Contrat  Social  and  the  Communist 
Manifesto  are  engines  of  highest  power  in  the  hands  of  forceful  men  who  have 
come  to  the  top  in  party  life  and  know  how  to  form  and  to  use  the  convictions 
of  the  dominated  masses.^ 

The  power  that  these  abstract  ideals  possess,  however,  scarcely  extends  in 
time  beyond  the  two  centuries  that  belong  to  party  politics,  and  their  end  comes 
not  from  refutation,  but  from  boredom  — which  has  killed  Rousseau  long  since 
and  will  shortly  kill  Marx.  Men  finally  give  up,  not  this  or  that  theory,  but 
the  belief  in  theory  of  any  kind  and  with  it  the  sentimental  optimism  of  an 
eighteenth  century  that  imagined  that  unsatisfactory  actualities  could  be 
improved  by  the  application  of  concepts.  When  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  their 
contemporaries  defined  and  blended  the  various  kinds  of  Classical  constitution 
so  as  to  obtain  a wise  and  beautiful  resultant,  all  the  world  listened,  and 
Plato  himself  tried  to  transform  Syracuse  in  accordance  with  an  ideological 
recipe — and  sent  the  city  downhill  to  its  ruin.^  It  appears  to  me  equally  certain 
that  it  was  philosophical  experimentation  of  this  kind  that  put  the  Chinese 
southern  states  out  of  condition  and  delivered  them  up  to  the  imperialism  of 
Tsin.®  The  Jacobin  fanatics  of  liberty  and  equality  delivered  France,  from  the 
Directory  onward,  into  the  hands  of  Army  and  Bourse  for  ever,  and  every 
Socialistic  oubreak  only  blazes  new  paths  for  Capitalism.  But  when  Cicero 
wrote  his  De  re  publica  for  Pompey,  and  Sallust  his  two  comminations  for  Cxsar, 
nobody  any  longer  paid  attention.  In  Tiberius  Gracchus  we  may  discover 
perhaps  an  influence  derived  from  the  Stoic  enthusiast  Blossius,  who  later 
committed  suicide  after  having  similarly  brought  Aristonicus  of  Pergamum  to 
ruin;  ^ but  in  the  first  century  b.c.  theories  had  become  a threadbare  school- 
exercise,  and  thenceforward  power  and  power  alone  mattered. 

For  us,  top  — let  there  be  no  mistake  about  it  — the  age  of  theory  is  draw- 
ing to  its  end.  The  great  systems  of  Liberalism  and  Socialism  all  arose  between 
about  1750  and  1850.  That  of  Marx  is  already  half  a century  old,  and  it  has 
had  no  successor.  Inwardly  it  means,  with  its  materialist  view  of  history,  that 
Nationalism  has  reached  its  extreme  logical  conclusion;  it  is  therefore  an 
end-term.  But,  as  belief  in  Rousseau’s  Rights  of  Man  lost  its  force  from  (say) 

^ - ^ ct  seq. 

2 For  the  story  of  this  tragic  experiment,  see  Ed.  Meyer,  Gesd,  d.  Ak.,  § 987,  et  seq. 

* See  p.  417.  The  “plans  of  the  Contending  States,”  the  Tchun-tsin-fan-lu,  and  the  biographies 
of  Sze-ma-tsien  are  full  of  examples  of  the  pedagogic  in  interventions  of  “ wisdom”  into  the  province 
■^of' politics.  :/":  ■ 

^ For  this  “Sun-state”  formed  of  slaves  and  day-labourers  see  Pauly-Wissowa,  Xeakncyel.,  2.,  961. 
Similarly,  the  revolutionary  King  Clcomencs  III  of  Sparta  was  likewise  under  the  influence  of  a Stoic, 
Sphasrus.  One  can  understand  why  “philosophers  and  rhetors” — i.c.,  professional  politicians, 
fantastics  and  subverters  — were  expelled  again  and  again  by  the  Roman  Senate. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS^^  ^ ^ 455 

1848,  so  belief  in  Marx  lost  its  force  from  the  World  War.  When  one  contrasts 
the  devotion  unto  death  that  Rousseau’s  ideas  found  in  the  French  Revolution 
with  the  attitude  of  the  Socialists  of  1918,  who  had  to  keep  up  before  and  in 
their  adherents  a conviction  that  they  themselves  no  longer  possessed  — for 
the  sake,  not  of  the  idea,  but  of  the  power  that  depended  on  it  — one  discerns 
also  the  stretches  of  the  road  ahead,  where  what  still  remains  of  program  is 
doomed  to  fall  by  the  way  as  being  henceforth  a mere  handicap  in  the  struggle 
for  power.  Belief  in  program  was  the  mark  and  the  glory  of  our  grandfathers 
— in  our  grandsons  it  will  be  a proof  of  provincialism.  In  its  place  is  develop- 
ing even  now  the  seed  of  a new  resigned  piety,  sprung  from  tortured  conscience 
and  spiritual  hunger,  whose  task  will  be  to  found  a new  Hither-side  that  looks 
for  secrets  instead  of  steel-bright  concepts  and  in  the  end  will  find  them  in  the 
deeps  of  the  ‘‘Second  Religiousness.”  ^ 

IV 

This  is  the  one  side,  the  verbal  side,  of  the  great  fact  Democracy.  It  remains 
now  to  consider  the  other,  the  decisive  side,  that  of  race.^  Democracy  would 
have  remained  in  minds  and  on  paper  had  there  not  been  amongst  its  champions 
true  master-natures  for  whom  — unconscious  though  they  may  be,  andsoften  have 
been,  of  the  fact  the  people  is  nothing  but  an  object  and  the  ideal  nothing 
but  a means.  All,  even  the  most  irresponsible,  methods  of  demagogy  — which 
inwardly  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  diplomacy  of  the  ancien  regime^  but  designed 
for  application  to  masses  instead  of  to  princes  and  ambassadors,  to  wild  opinions 
and  sentiments  and  will-outbursts  instead  of  to  choice  spirits,  an  orchestra  of 
brass  instead  of  old  chamber-music  — have  been  worked  out  by  honest  but 
practical  democrats,  and  it  was  from  them  that  the  parties  of  tradition  learnt 
them. 

It  is  characteristic,  however,  of  the  course  of  democracy,  that  the  authors 
of  popular  constitutions  have  never  had  any  idea  of  the  actual  workings  of  their 
schemes  — neither  the  authors  of  the  “Servian”  Constitution  in  Rome  nor  the 
National  Assembly  in  Paris.  Since  these  forms  of  theirs  are  not,  like  feudalism, 
the  result  of  growth,  but  of  thought  (and  based,  moreover,  not  on  deep  knowl- 
edge of  men  and  things,  but  on  abstract  ideas  of  right  and  justice),  a gulf  opens 
between  the  intellectual  side  of  the  laws  and  — the  practical  habits  that  silently 
form  under  the  pressure  of  them,  and  either  adapt  them  to,  or  fend  them  off 
from,  the  rhythm  of  actual  life.  Only  experience  has  ever  taught  the  lesson, 
and  only  at  the  end  of  the  whole  development  has  it  been  assimilated,  that  the 
rights  of  the  people  and  the  influence  of  the  people  are  two  different  things. 
The  more  nearly  universal  a franchise  is,  the  less  becomes  the  power  of  the  elec- 
torate. 


1 P.  310. 

2 P.  114, 


456  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

la  the  beginning  of  a democracy  the  field  belongs  to  intellect  alone.  History 
has  nothing  nobler  and  purer  to  show  than  the  night  session  of  the  4th  August 
1789  and  the  Tennis-Court  Oath,  or  the  assembly  in  the  Frankfurt  Paulskirche 
on  the  1 8th  May  1848  — when  men,  with  power  in  their  very  hands,  debated 
general  truths  so  long  that  the  forces  of  actuality  were  able  to  rally  and  thrust 
the  dreamers  aside.  But,  meantime,  that  other  democratic  quantity  lost  no 
time  in  making  its  appearance  and  reminding  men  of  the  fact  that  one  can 
make  use  of  constitutional  rights  only  when  one  has  money.  ^ That  a franchise 
should  work  even  approximately  as  the  idealist  supposes  it  to  work  presumes 
the  absence  of  any  organized  leadership  operating  on  the  electors  (in  its  interest) 
to  the  extent  that  its  available  money  permits.  As  soon  as  such  leadership 
does  appear,  the  vote  ceases  to  possess  anything  more  than  the  significance  of 
a censure  applied  by  the  multitude  to  the  individual  organizations,  over  whose 
structure  it  possesses  in  the  end  not  the  slightest  positive  influence.  So  also 
with  the  ideal  thesis  of  Western  constitutions,  the  fundamental  right  of  the 
mass  to  choose  its  own  representatives  — it  remains  pure  theory,  for  in  actu- 
ality every  developed  organization  recruits  itself.^  Finally  the  feeling  emerges 
that  the  universal  franchise  contains  no  effective  rights  at  all,  not  even  that 
of  choosing  between  parties.  For  the  powerful  figures  that  have  grown  up  on 
their  soil  control,  through  money,  all  the  intellectual  machinery  of  speech  and 
script,  and  are  able,  on  the  one  hand,  to  guide  the  individuaFs  opinions  as  they 
please  above  the  parties,  and,  on  the  other,  through  their  patronage,  influence, 
and  legislation,  to  create  a firm  body  of  whole-hearted  supporters  (the  '‘Cau- 
cus**) which  excludes  the  rest  and  induces  in  it  a vote-apathy  which  at  the  last 
it  cannot  shake  off  even  for  the  great  crises. 

In  appearance,  there  are  vast  differences  between  the  Western,  parliamentary, 
democracy  and  the  democracies  of  the  Egyptian,  Chinese,  and  Arabian  Civili- 
zations, to  which  the  idea  of  a universal  popular  franchise  is  wholly  alien. 
But  in  reality,  for  us  in  this  age  of  ours,  the  mass  is  “in  form**  as  an  electorate 
in  exactly  the  same  sense  as  it  used  to  be  “in  form*’  as  a collectivity  of  obedi- 
ence— namely,  as  m object  for  a subject — cls  it  was  “inform**  in  Baghdad  as 
the  sects,  and  in  Byizantium  in  its  monks,  and  elsewhere  again  as  a dominant 
army  or  a secret  society  or  a “state  within  a state.**  Freedom  is,  as  always, 
purely  negative}  It  consists  in  the  repudiation  of  tradition,  dynasty.  Caliphate; 
but  the  executive  power  passes,  at  once  and  undiminished,  from  these  institu- 
tions to  new  forces  — party  leaders,  dictators,  presidents,  prophets,  and  their 

1 The  early  democracy,  which  in  our  case  reaches  up  to  Lincoln,  Bismarck,  and  Gladstone,  has 
to  learn  this  by  exprimes.  The  later  democracy,  in  our  case  mature  parliamentarism,  starts  out  from 
it;  here  truths  and  facts  finally  separate  out  in  the  form  of  party  ideals  and  party  funds.  It  is  the 
money  that  gives  the  real  parliamentarian  his  sense  of  being  freed  from  the  dependence  which  is 
implicit  in  the  naive  idea  that  the  elector  has  of  his  delegate. 

2 P.  45a. 

« P.354. 


iWWPPPPiP 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  457 

adhereats  — towards  which  the  multitude  continues  to  be  unconditionally  the 
passive  object.^  “Popular  self-determination’*  is  a courteous  figure  of  speech 
—-  in  reality,  under  a universal-inorganic  franchise,  election  has  soon  ceased  to 
possess  its  original  meaning.  The  more  radical  the  political  elimination  of  the 
matured  old  order  of  Estates  and  callings,  the  more  formless  and  feckless  the 
electoral  mass,  the  more  completely  is  it  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  new 
powers,  the  party  leaders,  who  dictate  their  will  to  the  people  through  all 
the  machinery  of  intellectual  compulsion;  fence  with  each  other  for  primacy 
by  methods  which  in  the  end  the  multitude  can  neither  perceive  nor  compre- 
hend; and  treat  public  opinion  merely  as  a weapon  to  be  forged  and  used  for 
blows  at  each  other.  But  this  very  process,  viewed  from  another  angle,  is  seen 
as  an  irresistible  tendency  driving  every  democracy  further  and  further  on  the 
road  to  suicide.^ 

The  fundamental  rights  of  a Classical  people  (demos,  populus)  extended  to 
the  holding  of  the  highest  state  and  judicial  offices.®  For  the  exercise  of  these 
the  people  was  “in  form”  in  its  Forum,  where  the  Euclidean  point-mass  was 
corporeally  assembled,  and  there  it  was  the  object  of  an  influencing  process  in 
the  Classical  style;  namely,  by  bodily,  near,  and  sensuous  means  — by  a 
rhetoric  that  worked  upon  every  ear  and  eye;  by  devices  many  of  which  to  us 
would  be  repellent  and  almost  intolerable,  such  as  rehearsed  sob-effects  and  the 
rending  of  garments;  ^ by  shameless  flattery  of  the  audience,  fantastic  lies 
about  opponents;  by  the  employment  of  brilliant  phrases  and  resounding 
cadenzas  (of  which  there  came  to  be  a perfect  repertory  for  this  place  and  pur- 
pose) by  games  and  presents;  by  threats  and  blows;  but,  above  all,  by  money. 
We  have  its  beginnings  in  the  Athens  of  400/  and  its  appalling  culmination 

^ That  the  mass  all  the  same  feels  itself  as  freed  is  simply  another  outcome  of  the  profound 
incompatibility  between  megaiopolitan  spirit  and  mature  tradition.  Its  acPs,  so  far  from  being  in- 
dependent, are  in  inward  relation  with  its  subjection  to  money-rule. 

2 The  German  Constitution  of  1919  — standing  by  virtue  of  its  date  on  the  verge  of  the  decline 
of  democracy  — most  naively  admits  a dictature  of  the  party  machines,  which  have  attracted  all 
rights  into  themselves  and  arc  seriously  responsible  to  no  one.  The  notorious  system  of  proportional 
election  and  the  Reichslist  [see  Ency,  Brit,,  192-1  Supplement,  11,  149.  — Tr.]  secures  their  self-re- 
cruitment. In  place  of  the  “ people’s  ’ ’ rights,  which  were  axiomatic  in  the  Frankfurt  Constitution  of 
1848,  there  is  now  only  the  right  of  parties,  which,  harmless  as  it  sounds,  really  nurses  within  itself 
a Caesar  ism  of  the  organizations.  It  must  be  allowed,  however,  that  in  this  respect  it  is  the  most 
advanced  of  all  the  constitutions.  Its  issue  is  visible  already.  A few  quite  small  alterations  and  it 
confers  unrestricted  power  upon  individuals. 

® And  legislation,  too,  was  bound  up  with  an  office.  Even  when,  as  a formality,  acceptance  or 
rejection  by  an  assembly  was  requisite,  the  law  in  question  could  be  brought  in  only  by  an  official; 
for  example,  a Tribune.  The  constitutional  demands  of  the  masses,  therefore  (which  in  any  case 
were  mostly  instigated  by  the  real  power-holders),  expressed  themselves  in  the  issue  of  the  elections 
to  office,  as  the  Gracchan  period  shows. 

^ Even  Cxsar,  at  fifty  years  of  age,  was  obliged  to  play  this  comedy  at  the  Rubicon  for  his  soldiers 
because  they  were  used  to  it  and  expected  it  when  anything  was  asked  of  them.  It  corresponds  to  the 
“ chest-tones  of  deep  conviction  ” of  our  political  assemblies. 

^ But  the  Cleon  type  must  obviously  have  existed  also  in  contemporary  Sparta,  and  in  Rome  at 
the  time  of  the  Consular  Tribunes. 


458  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

ia  the  Rome  of  Caesar  and  Cicero.  As  everyivhere,  the  elections,  from  being 
nominations  of  class-representatives,  have  become  the  battle-ground  of  party 
candidates,  an  arena  ready  for  the  intervention  of  money,  and,  from  Zama 
onwards,  of  ever  bigger  and  bigger  money.  “The  greater  became  the  wealth 
which  was  capable  of  concentration  in  the  hands  of  individuals,  the  more 
the  fight  for  political  power  developed  into  a question  of  money.”  ^ It  is 
unnecessary  to  say  more.  And  yet,  in  a deeper  sense,  it  would  be  wrong  to 
speak  of  corruption.  It  is  not  a matter  of  degeneracy,  it  is  the  democratic 
ethos  itself  that  is  foredoomed  of  necessity  to  take  such  forms  when  it  reaches 
maturity.  In  the  reforms  of  the  Censor  Appius  Claudius  (310),  who  was  be- 
yond doubt  a true  Hellenist  and  constitutional  ideologue  of  the  type  of  Madame 
Roland’s  circle,  there  was  certainly  no  question  but  that  of  the  franchise  as 
such,  and  not  at  all  of  the  arts  of  gerrymandering  — - but  the  effect  was  simply  to 
prepare  the  way  for  those  arts.  Not  in  the  scheme  as  such,  but  from  the  first 
applications  of  it,  race-quality  emerged,  and  very  rapidly  it  forced  its  way  to 
complete  dominance.  And,  after  all,  in  a dictatorship  of  money  it  is  hardly 
fair  to  describe  the  employment  of  money  as  a sign  of  decadence. 

The  career  of  office  in  Rome  from  the  time  when  its  course  took  form  as  a 
series  of  elections,  required  so  large  a capital  that  every  politician  was  the 
debtor  of  his  entire  entourage.  Especially  was  this  so  in  the  case  of  the  aedile- 
ship,  in  which  the  incumbent  had  to  outbid  his  predecessors  in  the  magnificance 
of  his  public  games,  in  order  later  to  have  the  votes  of  the  spectators.  (Sulla 
failed  in  his  first  attempt  on  the  praetorship  precisely  because  he  had  not  pre- 
viously been  sedile.)  Then  again,  to  flatter  the  crowd  of  loafers  it  was  necessary 
to  show  oneself  in  the  Forum  daily  with  a brilliant  following.  A law  forbade 
the  maintenance  of  paid  retainers,  but  the  acquisition  of  persons  in  high  society 
by  lending  them  money,  recommending  them  for  official  and  commercial  em- 
ployments, and  covering  their  litigation  expenses,  in  return  for  their  company 
in  the  Forum  and  their  attendance  at  the  daily  levee,  was  more  expensive  still. 
Pompey  was  patronns  to  half  the  world.  From  the  peasant  of  Picenum  to  the 
kings  of  the  Orient,  he  represented  and  protected  them  all,  and  this  was  his 
political  capital  which  he  could  stake  against  the  non-interest-bearing  loans  of 
Crassus  and  the  “gilding”  ^ of  every  ambitious  fellow  by  the  conqueror  of 
Gaul.  Dinners  were  offered  to  the  electors  of  whole  wards, ^ or  free  scats  for 
the  gladiatorial  shows,  or  even  (as  in  the  case  of  Milo)  actual  cash,  delivered 
at  home  — out  of  respect,  Cicero  says,  for  traditional  morals.  Election-capital 
rose  to  American  dimensions,  sometimes  hundreds  of  millions  of  sesterces; 
vast  as  was  the  stock  of  cash  available  in  Rome,  the  elections  of  54  locked 
up  so  much  of  it  that  the  rate  of  interest  rose  from  four  to  eight  per  cent.  G^sar 

^ Gclzer,  NohiUm,  p.  94;  along  with  Ed,  Meyer’s  Casar  this  book  gives  the  best  survey  of 
Roman  democratic  methods, 

* “ Iftaurari”  to  which  end  Cicero  recommended  his  friend  Trebatius  to  Cxsar. 

* *'Ttibutim  ad  prandium  vocare”  Gccro,  Murena^  72.. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  455 

paid  out  so  mucli  as  xdilc  that  Crassus  had  to  underwrite  him  for  twenty  mil- 
lions before  his  creditors  would  allow  him  to  depart  to  his  province,  and  in 
his  candidature  for  the  ofSce  of  Pontifex  Maximus  he  so  overstrained  his  credit 
that  failure  would  have  ruined  him,  and  his  opponent  Catulus  could  seriously 
offer  to  buy  him  off.  But  the  conquest  and  exploitation  of  Gaul  — this  also  an 
undertaking  motived  by  finance  — made  him  the  richest  man  in  the  world. 
In  truth,  Pharsalus  was  won  there  in  advance.^  For  it  was  for  pomr  that 
Cxszt  amassed  these  milliards,  like  Cecil  Rhodes,  and  not  because  he  delighted 
in  wealth  like  Verres  or  even  like  Crassus,  who  was  first  and  foremost  a financier 
and  only  secondarily  a politician.  Cassar  grasped  the  fact  that  on  the  soil  of 
a democracy  constitutional  rights  signify  nothing  without  money  and  every- 
thing with  it.  When  Pompey  was  still  dreaming  that  he  could  evoke  legions 
by  stamping  on  the  ground,  Caesar  had  long  since  condensed  the  dream  to 
reality  with  his  money.  It  must  be  clearly  understood,  however,  that  he 
did  not  introduce  these  methods  but  found  them  in  existence,  that  he  made 
himself  master  of  them  but  never  identified  himself  with  them.  For  practically 
a century  parties  grouped  on  principles  had  been  dissolving  into  personal  follow- 
ings grouped  upon  men  who  pursued  private  political  aims  and  were  expert  in 
handling  the  political  weapons  of  their  time. 

Amongst  these  means,  besides  money,  was  influence  upon  the  courts.  Since 
Classical  assemblies  voted,  but  did  not  debate,  the  trial  before  the  rostra  was 
a form  of  party  battle  and  the  school  of  schools  for  political  persuasiveness.  The 
young  politician  began  his  career  by  indicting  and  if  possible  annihilating 
some  great  personage,^  as  the  nineteen-year-old  Crassus  annihilated  the  re- 
nowned Papirius  Carbo,  the  friend  of  the  Gracchi,  who  had  later  gone  over  to 
the  Optimates.  This  was  why  Cato  was  tried  no  less  than  forty-four  times, 
though  acquitted  in  every  case.  The  legal  side  of  the  question  was  entirely 
subordinate  in  these  affairs.^  The  decisive  factors  were  the  party  affinities 

^ For  from  that  time  sesterces  flowed  through  his  hands  by  the  million.  The  votive  treasures  of 
the  Gallic  temples  which  he  put  up  for  sale  in  Italy  sent  down  the  value  of  gold  with  a rush.  From 
King  Ptolemy  he  and  Pompey  extorted  144,000,000  (and  Gabinius  another  140,000,000)  as  the  price 
of  recognition.  The  Consul  .^Emilius  Paulius  (50)  was  bought  for  36,000,000,  Curio  for  60,000,000. 
We  can  guess  from  such  figures  how  enviable  was  the  position  of  his  closer  associates.  At  the  triumph 
of  46  every  soldier  in  an  army  of  well  over  100,000  men  received  14,000  sesterces,  officers  and  other 
leaders  much  more.  Yet  at  his  death  the  state  treasury  was  still  full  enough  to  secure  Antony’s 
position. 

^ Gelzer,  op.  cit.,  p.  68. 

® Extortion  and  corruption  were  the  usual  charges.  As  in  those  days  these  things  were  identical 
with  politics,  and  the  judges  and  plaintiffs  had  acted  precisely  in  the  same  way  as  the  defendants,  the 
art  consisted  in  using  the  forms  of  a well-acted  ethical  passion  to  cover  a party  speech,  of  which  the 
real  import  was  only  comprehensible  to  the  initiated.  This  corresponds  entirely  with  the  modern 
parliamentary  usage.  The  “people*'  would  be  very  much  astonished  to  sec  party  opponents,  after 
delivering  wild  speeches  in  the  chamber  (for  the  reporters)  chatting  together  in  the  lobbies,  or  to  be 
told  how  a party  passionately  champions  a proposal  after  it  has  made  certain  by  agreement  with  the 
other  side  that  it  will  not  be  passed.  In  Rome,  too,  the  judgment  was  not  the  important  thing  in 
these  “trials”;  it  was  enough  if  a defendant  voluntarily  left  the  city  and  so  retired  from  the  occu- 
pancy of,  or  candidature  for,  office. 


46o  : ' THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

of  the  judges,  the  number  of  patrons,  and  the  size  of  the  crowd  of  backers  — 
the  number  of  the  witnesses  was  really  only  paraded  in  order  to  bring  the 
financial  and  political  power  of  the  plaintiff  into  the  limelight.  The  intention 
in  all  Cicero’s  oratory  against  Verres  was  to  convince  the  judges,  under  the  veil 
of  fine  ethical  passion,  that  the  condemnation  of  the  accused  was  in  the  interests 
of  their  order,  Given  the  general  outlook  of  the  Classical,  the  courts  self-evi- 
dently existed  to  serve  private  and  party  interests.  Democratic  complainants 
in  Athens  were  accustomed  at  the  end  of  their  speeches  to  remind  the  jurymen 
from  the  people  that  they  would  forfeit  their  fees  by  acquitting  the  wealthy 
defendant.^  The  tremendous  power  of  the  Roman  Senate  consisted  mainly 
in  their  occupancy  of  every  seat  of  the  judicial  (jurors’)  bench,  which  placed 
the  destinies  of  every  citizen  at  their  mercy;  hence  the  far-reachingness  of  the 
Gracchan  law  of  ixx  which  handed  over  the  judicature  to  the  Equites  and  de- 
livered over  the  nobility  — that  is,  the  official  class  — to  the  financial  world.^ 
In  83  Sulla,  simultaneously  with  his  proscription  of  the  financial  magnates, 
restored  the  judicature  to  the  Senate,  as  political  weapon,  of  course,  and  the 
final  duel  of  the  potentates  finds  one  more  expression  in  the  ceaseless  changing 
of  the  judges  selected. 

Now,  whereas  the  Classical,  and  supremely  the  Forum  of  Rome,  drew  the 
mass  of  the  people  together  as  a visible  body  in  order  to  compel  it  to  make 
that  use  of  its  rights  which  was  desired  of  it,  the  “contemporary”  English- 
American  politics  have  created  through  the  press  a force-field  of  world-wide 
intellectual  and  financial  tensions  in  which  every  individual  unconsciously  takes 
up  the  place  allotted  to  him,  so  that  he  must  think,  will,  and  act  as  a ruling 
personality  somewhere  or  other  in  the  distance  thinks  fit.  This  is  dynamics 
against  statics,  Faustian  against  Apollinian  world-feeling,  the  passion  of  the 
third  dimension  against  the  pure  sensible  present.  Man  does  not  speak  to  man;  ® 
the  press  and  its  associate,  the  electrical  news-service,  keep  the  waking-con- 
sciousness of  whole  peoples  and  continents  under  a deafening  drum-fire  of 
theses,  catchwords,  standpoints,  scenes,  feelings,  day  by  day  and  year  by  year, 
so  that  every  Ego  becomes  a mere  function  of  a monstrous  intellectual  Some- 
thing. Money  does  not  pass,  politically,  from  one  hand  to  the  other.  It  does 
not  turn  itself  into  cards  and  wine.  It  is  turned  into and  its  quantity 
determines  the  intensity  of  its  working  influence. 

Gunpowder  and  printing  belong  together  — both  discovered  at  the  culmina- 
tion of  the  Gothic,  both  arising  out  of  Germanic  technical  thought  — as  the  two 
grand  means  of  Faustian  distance-tactics.  The  Reformation  in  the  beginning  of 

1 See  Pohlmann,  Grkch,  Gesch,  (1914),  pp.  2.^6 fet  seq."  [Cf.  Aristophanes,  Wasp.  — Tr.] 

® Thus  it  was  possible  for  Rutilius  Rufus  to  be  condemned  in  the  notorious  case  of  93,  because 
as  proconsul  he  had  in  accordance  with  his  duty  proceeded  against  the  extortions  of  the  concession- 
nairc  associations. 

® Radio  broadcasting  has  now  emerged  to  enable  the  leader  to  make  personal  conquests  of  the 
million,  and  no  one  can  foretell  the  changes  in  political  tactic  that  may  ensue  therefrom.  — Tr. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  461 

the  Late  period  witnessed  the  first  flysheets  and  the  first  field-guns,  the  French 
Revolution  in  the  beginning  of  the  Civilization  witnessed  the  first  tempest  of 
pamphlets  of  the  autumn  of  1788  and  the  first  mass-fire  of  artillery  at  Valmy. 
But  with  this  the  printed  word,  produced  in  vast  quantity  and  distributed  over 
enormous  areas,  became  an  uncanny  weapon  in  the  hands  of  him  who  knew  how 
to  use  it.  In  France  it  was  still  in  1788  a matter  of  expressing  private  con- 
victions, but  England  was  already  past  that,  and  deliberately  seeking  to  produce 
impressions  on  the  reader.  The  war  of  articles,  flysheets,  spurious  memoirs, 
that  was  waged  from  London  on  French  soil  against  Napoleon  is  the  first  great 
example.  The  scattered  sheets  of  the  Age  of  Enlightenment  transformed  them- 
selves into  ‘‘the  Press*’  — a term  of  most  significant  anonymity.  Now  the 
press  campaign  appears  as  the  prolongation  — or  the  preparation  • — of  war  by 
other  means,  and  in  the  course  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  strategy  of  outpost 
fights,  feints,  surprises,  assaults,  is  developed  to  such  a degree  that  a war  may 
be  lost  ere  the  first  shot  is  fiired  — because  the  Press  has  won  it  meantime. 

To-day  we  live  so  cowed  under  the  bombardment  of  this  intellectual  artillery 
that  hardly  anyone  can  attain  to  the  inward  detachment  that  is  required  for  a 
clear  view  of  the  monstrous  drama.  The  will-to-powcr  operating  under  a pure 
democratic  disguise  has  finished  off  its  masterpiece  so  well  that  the  object’s 
sense  of  freedom  is  actually  flattered  by  the  most  thorough-going  enslavement 
that  has  ever  existed.  The  liberal  bourgeois  mind  is  proud  oi  the  abolition  of 
censorship,  the  last  restraint,  while  the  dictator  of  the  press  — Northcliffe!  — 
keeps  the  slave-gang  of  his  readers  under  the  whip  of  his  leading  articles, 
telegrams,  and  pictures.  Democracy  has  by  its  newspaper  completely  expelled  the  book 
from  the  mental  life  of  the  people.  The  book-world,  with  its  profusion  of  stand- 
points that  compelled  thought  to  select  and  criticize,  is  now  a real  possession 
only  for  a few.  The  people  reads  the  one  paper,  “its”  paper,  which  forces 
itself  through  the  front  doors  by  millions  daily,  spellbinds  the  intellect  from 
morning  to  night,  drives  the  book  into  oblivion  by  its  more  engaging  layout, 
and  if  one  or  another  specimen  of  a book  does  emerge  into  visibility,  forestalls 
and  eliminates  its  possible  effects  by  “reviewing”  it. 

What  is  truth?  For  the  multitude,  that  which  it  continually  reads  and  hears. 
A forlorn  little  drop  may  settle  somewhere  and  collect  grounds  on  which  to 
determine  “ the  truth”  — but  what  it  obtains  is  just  its  truth.  The  other,  the 
public  truth  of  the  moment,  which  alone  matters  for  effects  and  successes  in 
the  fact-world,  is  to-day  a product  of  the  Press.  What  the  Press  wills,  is  true. 
Its  commanders  evoke,  transform,  interchange  truths.  Three  weeks  of  press 
work,  and  the  truth  is  acknowledged  by  everybody.^  Its  bases  are  irrefutable  for 

^ The  most  striking  example  of  this  for  fnture  generations  will  be  the  “War-guilt”  question, 
which  is  the  question  — who  possesses  the  power,  through  control  of  press  and  cable  in  all  parts  of 
the  world,  to  establish  in  world-opinion  that  truth  which  he  needs  for  his  political  ends  and  to 
maintain  it  for  so  long  as  he  needs  it?  An  altogether  different  question  (which  only  in  Germany  is 
confused  with  the  first)  is  the  purely  scientific  one  — to  whose  interest  was  it  that  an  event  about 
which  there  was  already  a whole  literature  should  occur  in  the  summer  of  1314  in  particular? 


46i  the  decline  OF  THE  WEST 

jmst  so  long  as  money  is  available  to  maintain  them  intact.  The  Classical 
rhetoric,  too,  was  designed  for  effect  and  not  content — ^ as  Shakespeare  bril- 
liantly demonstrates  in  Antony’s  funeral  oration but  it  did  limit  itself  to 
the  bodily  audience  and  the  moment.  What  the  dynamism  of  our  Press  wants  is 
pfmamnt  effectiveness.  It  must  keep  men’s  minds  continuously  under  its  in- 
fluence. Its  arguments  are  overthrown  as  soon  as  the  advantage  of  financial 
power  passes  over  to  the  counter-arguments  and  brings  these  still  oftener  to 
men’s  eyes  and  ears.  At  that  moment  the  needle  of  public  opinion  swings 
round  to  the  stronger  pole.  Everybody  convinces  himself  at  once  of  the  new 
truth,  and  regards  himself  awakened  out  of  error. 

With  the  political  press  is  bound  up  the  need  of  universal  school-education, 
which  in  the  Classical  world  was  completely  lacking.  In  this  demand  there  is  an 
element  ■ — quite  unconscious  — of  desiring  to  shepherd  the  masses,  as  the 
object  of  party  politics,  into  the  newspaper’s  power-area.  The  idealist  of  the 
early  democracy  regarded  popular  education,  without  arrim  pensee,  as  enlighten- 
ment pure  and  simple,  and  even  to-day  one  finds  here  and  there  weak  heads 
that  become  enthusiastic  on  the  Freedom  of  the  Press  — but  it  is  precisely  this 
that  smooths  the  path  for  the  coming  Caesars  of  the  world-press.  Those  who 
have  learnt  to  read  succumb  to  their  power,  and  the  visionary  self-determina- 
tion of  Late  democracy  issues  in  a thorough-going  determination  of  the  people 
by  the  powers  whom  the  printed  word  obeys. 

In  the  contests  of  to-day  tactics  consists  in  depriving  the  opponent  of  this 
weapon.  In  the  unsophisticated  infancy  of  its  power  the  newspaper  suffered 
from  official  censorship  which  the  champions  of  tradition  wielded  in  self- 
defence,  and  the  bourgeoisie  cried  out  that  the  freedom  of  the  spirit  was  in 
danger.  Now  the  multitude  placidly  goes  its  way;  it  has  definitively  won  for 
itself  this  freedom.  But  in  the  background,  unseen,  the  new  forces  are  fighting 
one  another  by  buying  the  press.  Without  the  reader’s  observing  it,  the  paper, 
and  himself  with  it,  changes  masters,^  Here  also  money  triumphs  and  forces  the 
free  spirits  into  its  service.  No  tamer  has  his  animals  more  under  his  power. 
Unleash  the  people  as  reader-mass  and  it  will  storm  through  the  streets  and  hurl 
itself  upon  the  target  indicated,  terrifying  and  breaking  windows;  a hint  to  the 
press-staff  and  it  will  become  quiet  and  go  home.  The  Press  to-day  is  an  army 
with  carefully  organized  arms  and  branches,  with  journalists  as  officers,  and 
readers  as  soldiers.  But  here,  as  in  every  army,  the  soldier  obeys  blindly,  and 
war-aims  and  operation-plans  change  without  his  knowledge.  The  reader 

^ In  preparation  for  the  World  War  the  press  of  whole  countries  was  brought  financially  under 
the  command  of  London  and  Paris,  and  the  peoples  belonging  to  them  reduced  to  an  unqualified 
intellectual  slavery.  The  more  democratic  the  inner  form  of  a nation  is,  the  more  readily  and  com- 
pletely it  succumbs  to  this  danger.  This  is  the  style  of  the  twentieth  century.  To-day  a democrat 
of  the  old  school  would  demand,  not  freedom  for  the  press,  but  freedom  from  the  press;  but  mean- 
time the  leaders  have  changed  themselves  into  parvenus  who  have  to  secure  their  postion  vis~^is 
the  masses. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  463 

neither  knows,  nor  is  allowed  to  know,  the  purposes  for  which  he  is  used,  nor 
even  the  r61e  that  he  is  to  play.  A more  appalling  caricature  of  freedom  of 
thought  cannot  be  imagined.  Formerly  a man  did  not  dare  to  think  freely. 
Now  he  dares,  but  cannot;  his  will  to  think  is  only  a willingness  to  think  to 
order,  and  this  is  what  he  feels  as  liberty. 

And  the  other  side  of  this  belated  freedom  — it  is  permitted  to  everyone  to 
say  what  he  pleases,  hut  the  Press  is  free  to  take  notice  of  what  he  says  or  not. 
It  can  condemn  any  truth”  to  death  simply  by  not  undertaking  its  communi- 
cation to  the  world  — a terrible  censorship  of  silence,  which  is  all  the  more 
potent  in  that  the  masses  of  newspaper  readers  are  absolutely  unaware  that  it 
exists.^  Here,  as  ever  in  the  birth-pangs  of  Ca^sarism,  emerges  a trait  of  the 
buried  springtime.^  The  arc  of  happening  is  about  to  close  on  itself.  Just  as  in 
the  concrete  and  steel  buildings  the  expression-will  of  early  Gothic  oiice  more 
bursts  forth,  but  cold,  controlled,  and  Civilized,  so  the  iron  will  of  the  Gothic 
Church  to  power  over  souls  reappears  as  — the  “freedom  of  democracy.”  The 
age  of  the  “book”  is  flanked  on  either  hand  by  that  of  the  sermon  and  that  of 
the  newspaper.  Books  are  a personal  expression,  sermon  and  newspaper  obey 
an  impersonal  purpose.  The  years  of  Scholasticism  afford  the  only  example  in 
world-history  of  an  intellectual  discipline  that  was  applied  universally  and 
permitted  no  writing,  no  speech,  no  thought  to  come  forth  that  contradicted 
the  mlled  unity.  This  is  spiritual  dynamics.  Classical,  Indian,  or  Chinese 
mankind  would  have  been  horrified  at  this  spectacle.  But  the  same  things 
recur,  and  as  a necessary  result  of  the  European- American  liberalism  — “ the 
despotism  of  freedom  against  tyranny,”  as  Robespierre  put  it.  In  lieu  of  stake 
and  faggots  there  is  the  great  silence.  The  dictature  of  party  leaders  supports 
itself  upon  that  of  the  Press.  The  competitors  strive  by  means  of  money  to  detach 
readers  — nay,  peoples  — en  masse  from  the  hostile  allegiance  and  to  bring 
them  under  their  own  mind-training.  And  all  that  they  learn  in  this  mind- 
training, is  what  it  is  considered  that  they  should  know  — a higher  will  puts 
together  the  picture  of  their  world  for  them.  There  is  no  need  now,  as  there 
was  for  Baroque  princes,  to  impose  military-service  liability  on  the  subject  — 
one  whips  their  souls  with  articles,  telegrams,  and  pictures  (Northcliffe!) 
until  they  clamour  for  weapons  and  force  their  leaders  into  a conflict  to  which 
they  to  be  forced. 

This  is  the  end  of  Democracy.  If  in  the  world  of  truths  it  is  proof  that  decides 
all,  in  that  of  facts  it  is  success.  Success  means  that  one  being  triumphs  over 
the  others.  Life  has  won  through,  and  the  dreams  of  the  world-improvers  have 
turned  out  to  be  but  the  tools  of  rmster-rmmt^.  In  the  Late  Democracy,  race 
bursts  forth  and  either  makes  ideals  its  slaves  or  throws  them  scornfully  into 
the  pit.  It  was  so,  too,  in  Egyptian  Thebes,  in  Rome,  in  China  — but  in  no 

^ The  great  Burning  of  the  Books  in  China  (p.  433)  was  innocuous  by  comparison. 

" P.  434* 


464  ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE- WEST' 

other  Civilization  has  the  will-to-power  manifested  itself  in  so  inexorable 
a form  as  in  this  of  ours.  The  thought,  and  consequently  the  action,  of  the 
mass  are  kept  under  iron  pressure  — for  which  reason,  and  for  which  reason 
only,  men  are  permitted  to  be  readers  and  voters  — that  is,  in  a dual  slavery  — 
while  the  parties  become  the  obedient  retinues  of  a few,  and  the  shadow  of 
coming  Cxsarism  already  touches  them.  As  the  English  kingship  became  in 
the  nineteenth  century,  so  parliaments  will  become  in  the  twentieth,  a solemn 
and  empty  pageantry.  As  then  sceptre  and  crown,  so  now  peoples’  rights  are 
paraded  for  the  multitude,  and  all  the  more  punctiliously  the  less  they  really 
signify  — it  was  for  this  reason  that  the  cautious  Augustus  never  let  pass  an 
opportunity  of  emphasizing  old  and  venerated  customs  of  Roman  freedom. 
But  the  power  is  migrating  even  to-day,  and  correspondingly  elections  are 
degenerating  for  us  into  the  farce  that  they  were  in  Rome.  Money  organizes  the 
process  in  the  interests  of  those  who  possess  it,^  and  election  affairs  become  a 
preconcerted  game  that  is  staged  as  popular  self-determination.  If  election  was 
originally  revolution  in  legitimate  forms, ^ it  has  exhausted  those  forms,  and  what 
takes  place  is  that  mankind  “ elects”  its  Destiny  again  by  the  primitive  methods 
of  bloody  violence  when  the  politics  of  money  become  intolerable. 

Through  money,  democracy  becomes  its  own  destroyer,  after  money  has 
destroyed  intellect.  But,  just  because  the  illusion  that  actuality  can  allow  itself 
to  be  improved  by  the  ideas  of  any  Zeno  or  Marx  has  fled  away;  because  men 
have  learned  that  in  the  realm  of  reality  one  power-will  be  overthrown  only  by 
another  (for  that  is  the  great  human  experience  of  Contending  States  periods); 
there  wakes  at  last  a deep  yearning  for  all  old  and  worthy  tradition  that  still 
lingers  alive.  Men  are  tired  to  disgust  of  money-economy.  They  hope  for 
salvation  from  somewhere  or  other,  for  some  real  thing  of  honour  and  chivalry, 
of  inward  nobility,  of  unselfishness  and  duty.  And  now  dawns  the  time  when 
the  form-filled  powers  of  the  blood,  which  the  rationalism  of  the  Megalopolis 
has  suppressed,  reawaken  in  the  depths.  Everything  in  the  order  of  dynastic 
tradition  and  old  nobility  that  has  saved  itself  up  for  the  future,  everything  that 
there  is  of  high  money-disdaining  ethic,  everything  that  is  intrinsically  sound 
enough  to  be,  in  Frederick  the  Great’s  words,  the  servant  — the  hard-working, 
self-sacrificing,  caring  servant  — of  the  State,  all  that  I have  described  elsewhere 
in  one  word  as  Socialism  in  contrast  to  Capitalism  ® — all  this  becomes  suddenly 
the  focus  of  immense  life-forces.  Caesarism  grows  on  the  soil  of  Democracy,  but 
its  roots  thread  deeply  into  the  underground  of  blood  tradition.  The  Classical 

^ Herein  lies  the  secret  of  why  all  radical  (i  e.,  poor)  parties  necessarily  become  the  tools  of  the 
money-powers,  the  Equites,  the  Bourse.  Theoretically  their  enemy  is  capital,  but  practically  they 
attack,  not  the  Bourse,  but  Tradition  on  behalf  of  the  Bourse.  This  is  as  true  of  to-day  as  it  was  for 
the  Gracchan  age,  and  in  all  countries.  Fifty  per  cent  of  mass-leaders  arc  procurable  by  money, 
office,  or  opportunities  to  '*come  in  on  the  ground-floor,”  and  with  them  they  bring  their  whole 
party. 

® Sec  Preassmtum  and  SotiaUsnmSy  p.  41,  ct  seq,. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  POLITICS  465 

Ca:sar  derived  his  power  from  the  Tribunate,  and  his  dignity  and  therewith  his 
permanency  from  his  being  the  Princeps.  Here  too  the  soul  of  old  Gothic 
wakens  anew.  The  spirit  of  the  knightly  orders  overpowers  plunderous  Viking- 
ism.  The  mighty  ones  of  the  future  may  possess  the  earth  as  their  private 
property  for  the  great  political  form  of  the  Culture  is  irremediably  in  ruin  — 
but  it  matters  not,  for,  formless  and  limitless  as  their  power  may  be,  it  has  a 
task.  And  this  task  is  the  unwearying  care  for  this  world  as  it  is,  which  is  the 
very  opposite  of  the  interestedness  of  the  money-power  age,  and  demands 
high  honour  and  conscientiousness.  But  for  this  very  reason  there  now 
sets  in  the  final  battle  between  Democracy  and  Cassarism,  between  the  leading 
forces  of  dictatorial  money-economics  and  the  'purely  political  will-to-ordcr  of 
the  Casses.  And  in  order  to  understand  this  final  battle  between  Economics  anA 
Politics,  in  which  the  latter  reconquers  its  realm,  we  must  now  turn  our  glance 
upon  the  physiognomy  of  economic  history. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  FORM-WORLD  OF  ECONOMIC  LIFE 


(A) 

MONEY 


CHAPTER  XIII 


THE  FORM-WORLD  OF  ECONOMIC  LIFE 

(A) 

MONET 

I 

The  standpoint  from  which  to  comprehend  the  economic  history  of  great 
Cultures  is  not  to  be  looked  for  on  economic  ground*  Economic  thought  and 
action  are  a side  of  life  that  acquires  a false  appearance  when  regarded  as  a 
self-contained  kind  of  life.  Least  of  all  is  the  secure  standpoint  to  be  had  on  the 
basis  of  the  present-day  world-economics,  which  for  the  last  150  years  has  been 
mounting  fantasticaily,  perilously,  and  in  the  end  almost  desperately  — an 
economics,  moreover,  that  is  exclusively  Western-dynamic,  anything  but  com- 
mon-human. 

That  which  we  call  national  economy  to-day  is  built  up  on  premisses  that 
are  openly  and  specifically  English.  The  industry  of  machines,  which  is  un- 
known to  all  other  Cultures,  stands  in  the  centre  as  though  it  were  a matter  of 
course  and,  without  men  being  conscious  of  the  fact,  completely  dominates  the 
formulation  of  ideas  and  the  deduction  of  so-called  laws.  Credit-money,  in  the 
special  form  imparted  to  it  by  the  relations  of  world- trade  and  export-industry 
in  a peasantless  England,  serves  as  the  foundation  whereupon  to  define  words 
like  capital,  value,  price,  property  — and  the  definitions  are  then  transferred 
without  more  ado  to  other  Culture-stages  and  life-cycles.  The  insular  position 
of  England  has  determined  a conception  of  politics,  and  of  its  relation  to  eco- 
nomics, that  rules  in  all  economic  theories.  The  creators  of  this  economic 
picture  were  David  Hume  ^ and  Adam  Smith. ^ Everything  that  has  since  been 
written  about  them  or  against  them  always  presupposes  the  critical  structure 
and  methods  of  their  systems.  This  is  as  true  of  Carey  and  List  as  it  is  of  Fourier 
and  Lassalle.  As  for  Smith’s  greatest  adversary,  Marx,  it  matters  little  how 
loudly  one  protests  against  English  capitalism  when  one  is  thoroughly  imbued 
with  its  images;  the  protest  is  itself  a recognition,  and  its  only  aim  is,  through 
a new  kind  of  accounting,  to  confer  upon  objects  the  advantage  of  being  sub- 
jects. 

From  Adam  Smith  to  Marx  it  is  nothing  but  self-analysis  of  the  economic 
thinking  of  a single  Culture  on  a particular  development-level-  Rationalistic 
through  and  through,  it  starts  from  Material  and  its  conditions,  needs,  and 

^ ’Bolitkal  Discourses,  1752- 
® The  celebrated  Wealth  of  Nations,  1776. 

469 


470  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

motives,  instead  of  from  the  Soul  — of  generations.  Estates,  and  peoples  — and 
its  creative  power.  It  looks  upon  men  as  constituent  parts  of  situations,  and 
knows  nothing  of  the  big  personality  and  history-shaping  will,  of  individuals 
or  of  groups,  the  will  that  sees  in  the  facts  of  economics  not  ends  but  means.  It 
takes  economic  life  to  be  something  that  can  be  accounted  for  without  remainder 
by  visible  causes  and  effects,  something  of  which  the  structure  is  quite  mechani- 
cal and  completely  self-contained  and  even,  finally,  something  that  stands  in 
some  sort  of  causal  relation  to  religion  and  politics  — these  again  being  con- 
sidered as  individual  self-contained  domains.  As  this  outlook  is  the  systematic 
and  not  the  historical,  the  timeless  and  universal  validity  of  its  concepts  and 
rules  is  an  article  of  faith,  and  its  ambition  is  to  establish  the  one  and  only  cor- 
rect method  of  applying  “the”  science  of  management.  And  accordingly, 
wherever  its  truths  have  come  into  contact  with  the  facts,  it  has  experienced  a 
complete  fiasco  — as  was  the  case  with  the  prophecies  of  bourgeois  theorists 
concerning  the  World  War,^  and  with  those  of  proletarian  theorists  on  the 
induction  of  the  Soviet  economy. 

Up  to  now,  therefore,  there  has  been  no  national  economy,  in  the  sense  of  a 
morphology  of  the  economic  side  of  life  and  more  particularly  of  that  side  in  the 
life  of  the  high  Cultures,  with  their  formations  — concordant  as  to  stage, 
tempo,  and  duration  — of  economic  styles.  Economics  has  no  system,  but  a 
physiognomy.  To  fathom  the  secret  of  its  inner  form,  its  soul^  demands  the 
physiognomic  flair.  To  succeed  in  it  it  is  necessary  to  be  a “ judge”  of  it  as 
one  is  a “ judge”  of  men  or  of  horses,  and  requires  even  less  ” knowledge”  than 
that  which  a horseman  needs  to  have  of  zodlogy.  But  this  faculty  of  **  judg- 
ment” can  be  awakened,  and  the  way  to  awaken  it  is  through  the  sympathetic 
outlook  on  history  which  gives  a shrewd  idea  of  the  race-instincts,  which 
are  at  work  in  the  economic  as  in  other  constituents  of  active  existence,  sym- 
bolically shaping  the  external  position  — the  economic  “stuff,”  the  need — 
in  harmony  with  their  own  inner  character.  All  economic  life  is  the  expression  of 
a soul4ife.  • 

This  is  a new,  a German,  outlook  upon  economics,  an  outlook  from  beyond 
all  Capitalism  and  Socialism  — both  of  which  were  products  of  the  jejune 
rationality  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  aimed  at  nothing  but  a material 
analysis  and  subsequent  synthesis  of  the  economic  surface.  All  that  has  been 
taught  hitherto  is  no  more  than  preparatory.  Economic  thought,  like  legal, ^ 
stands  now  on  the  verge  of  its  true  and  proper  development,  which  (for  us,  as 
for  the  Hcllenistic-Roman  age)  sets  in  only  where  art  and  philosophy  have 
irrevocably  passed  away. 

The  attempt  which  follows  is  meant  only  as  a flying  survey  of  the  possi- 
bilities here  available. 

- It  was  the  opinion  of  the  expert,  almost  everywhere,  that  the  economic  consequences  of  general 
mobilization  would  compel  the  breaking-up  of  hostilities  within  a few  weeks. 


MONEY  471 

Economics  and  politics  arc  sides  of  the  om  Hvingly  flowing  current  of  being, 
and  not  of  the  waking-consciousness,  the  intellect.^  In  each  of  them  is  mani- 
fested the  pulse  of  the  cosmic  flowings  that  are  occluded  in  the  sequent  genera- 
tions of  individual  existences.  They  may  be  said,  not  to  have  history,  but 
to  history.  Irreversible  Time,  the  When,  rules  in  them.  They  belong,  both 
of  them,  to  race  and  not,  as  religion  and  science  belong,  to  language  with  its 
spatial-causal  tensions;  they  regard  facts,  not  truths.  There  are  economic 
Destinies  as  there  are  political,  whereas  in  scientific  doctrines,  as  in  religious, 
there  is  timeless  connexion  of  cause  and  effect, 

' Life,  therefore,  has  a political  and  an  economic  kind  of  ‘‘condition’*  of 
fitness  for  history.  They  overlie,  they  support,  they  oppose  each  other,  but  the 
political  is  unconditionally  the  first.  Life’s  will  is  to  preserve  itself  and  to  pre- 
vails or,  rather,  to  make  itself  stronger  in  order  that  it  may  prevail.  But  in  the 
economic  state  of  fitness  the  being-streams  are  fit  as  r^//-regarding,  whereas  in  a 
political  they  are  fit  as  #i>^f-regarding.  And  this  holds  good  ail  along  the  series, 
from  the  simplest  unicellular  plant  to  swarms  and  to  peoples  of  the  highest  free 
mobility  in  space.  Nourishment  and  winning-through  — the  difference  of 
dignity  between  the  two  sides  of  life  is  recognizable  in  their  relation  to  death. 
There  is  no  contrast  so  profound  as  that  hetween  hunger-death  and  hero-deatL 
Economically  life  is  in  the  widest  sense  threatened,  dishonoured,  and  debased 
by  hunger  — with  which  is  to  be  included  stunting  of  possibilities,  straitened 
circumstances,  darkness,  and  pressure  not  less  than  starvation  in  the  literal 
sense.  Whole  peoples  have  lost  the  tense  force  of  their  race  through  the  gnaw- 
ing wrretchedness  of  their  living.  Here  men  die  <7/  something  and  not  some- 
thing. Politics  sacrifices  men  for  an  idea,  they  fall  for  an  idea;  but  economy 
merely  wastes  them  away,  the  creator^  hunger  the  destroyer,  of  all  great  things. 

In  war  life  is  elevated  by  death,  often  to  that  point  of  irresistible  force 
whose  mere  existence  guarantees  victory,  but  in  the  economic  life  hunger 
awakens  the  ugly,  vulgar,  and  wholly  unmetaphysical  sort  of  fearfulness  for 
one’s  life  under  which  the  higher  form-world  of  a Culture  miserably  collapses 
and  the  naked  struggle  for  existence  of  the  human  beasts  begins. 

The  double  sense  of  all  history  that  is  manifested  in  man  and  woman  has  been 
discussed  in  an  earlier  chapter.^  There  is  a private  history  which  represents  “life 
in  space”  as  a procreation-series  of  the  generations,  and  a public  history  that 
defends  and  secures  it  as  a political  “ in-form ”-ness  — the  “spindle  side”  and 
the  “ sword  side”  of  being.  They  find  expression  in  the  ideas  of  Family  and  of 
State,  but  also  in  the  primary  form  of  the  house  ® wherein  the  good  spirits  of  the 
marriage-bed  — the  Genius  and  the  Juno  of  every  old  Roman  dwelling  — were 
protected  by  that  of  the  door,  the  Janus.  To  this  private  history  of  the  family 


47Z  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

the  economic  now  attached  itself.  The  duration  of  a flourishing  life  is  in- 
separable from  its  strength;  its  secret  of  begetting  and  conceiving  is  seen  at  its 
purest  in  the  being  of  breed-strong  peasant  stock  that  is  rooted,  healthy  and 
fruitful,  in  its  soil.  And  as  in  the  form  of  the  body  the  organ  of  sex  is  bound  up 
with  that  of  the  circulation,|so  the  middle  of  the  house  in  another  sense  is  formed 
by  the  sacred  hearths,  the  Vesta. 

For  this  very  reason  the  significance  of  economic  history  is  something  quite 
different  from  that  of  political.  In  the  latter  the  foreground  is  taken  up  by  the 
great  individual  destinies,  which  fulfil  themselves  indeed  in  the  binding  forms 
of  their  epoch,  but  are  nevertheless,  each  in  itself,  strictly  personal.  The 
concern  of  the  former,  and  of  family  history,  is  the  course  of  development  of  the 
{otmrlanguage;  everything  once-occurring  and  personal  is  an  unimportant  pri- 
vate-destiny, and  only  the  basic  form  common  to  the  million  cases  matters. 
But  even  so  economics  is  only  a foundation,  for  Being  that  is  in  any  way  mean- 
ingful. What  really  signifies  is  not  that  an  individual  or  a people  is  **  in  condi- 
tion,*’ well  nourished  and  fruitful,  but  for  what  he  or  it  is  so;  and  the  higher 
man  climbs  historically,  the  more  conspicuously  his  political  and  religious 
will  to  inward  symbolism  and  force  of  expression  towers  above  everything 
in  the  way  of  form  and  depth  that  the  economic  life  as  such  possesses.  It 
is  only  with  the  coming  of  the  Civilization,  when  the  whole  form-world 
begins  to  ebb,  that  mere  life-preserving  begins  to  outline  itself,  nakedly  and 
insistently  ■—  this  is  the  time  when  the  banal  assertion  that  “hunger  and  love** 
are  the  driving  forces  of  life  ceases  to  be  ashamed  of  itself;  when  life  comes  to 
mean,  not  a waxing  in  strength  for  the  task,  but  a matter  of  “happiness  of  the 
greatest  number,”  of  comfort  and  ease,  of  fanem  et  circenses**;  and  when,  in 
the  place  of  grand  politics,  we  have  economic  politics  as  an  end  in  itself. 

Since  economics  belongs  to  the  race  side  of  life,  it  possesses,  like  politics,  a 
customary  ethic  and  not  a moral  — yet  again  the  distinction  of  nobility  and 
priesthood,  facts  and  truths.  A vocation-class,  like  an  Estate,  possesses  a 
matter-of-course  feeling  for  (not  good  and  evil,  but)  good  and  bad.  Not  to  have 
this  feeling  is  to  be  void  of  honour,  law.  For  those  engaged  in  the  economic 
life,  too,  honour  stands  as  central  criterion,  with  its  tact  and  fine  flair  for  what 
is  “the  right  thing**  — something  quite  separate  from  the  sin-idea  underlying 
the  religious  contemplation  of  the  world.  There  exist,  not  only  a very  definite 
vocational  honour  amongst  merchants,  craftsmen,  and  peasants,  but  equally 
definite  gradations  downward  for  the  shopkeeper,  the  exporter,  the  banker, 
the  contractor,  and  even,  as  we  all  know,  for  thieves  and  beggars,  in  so  far  as 
two  or  three  of  them  feel  themselves  as  fellow  practitioners.  No  one  has 
stated  or  written  out  these  customary-ethics,  but  they  exist,  and,  like  class- 
ethics  everywhere  and  always,  they  are  binding  only  within  the  circle  of  mem- 
bership. Along  with  the  noble  virtues  of  loyalty  and  courage,  chivalry  and 


MONEY  473 

comradeship,  which  are  found  in  every  vocational  society,  there  appear  clean- 
cut  notions  of  the  ethical  value  of  industry,  of  success,  of  work,  and  an  as- 
tonishing sense  of  distinction  and  apartness.  This  sort  of  thing  a man  has 
— and  without  knowing  much  about  it,  for  custom  is  evidenced  to  consciousness 
only  when  it  is  infringed  — while,  on  the  contrary,  the  prohibitions  of  religion 
which  are  timeless,  universally  valid,  but  never  realizable  ideals,  must  be 
learned  before  a man  can  know  or  attempt  to  follow  them. 

Religious-ascetic  fundamentals  such  as  “selfless,**  “sinless,**  are  without 
meaning  in  the  economic  life.  For  the  true  saint  economics  in  itself  is  sinful,^ 
and  not  merely  taking  of  interest  or  pleasure  in  riches  or  the  envy  of  the  poor. 
The  saying  concerning  the  “lilies  of  the  field*’  is  for  deeply  religious  (and 
philosophical)  natures  unreservedly  true.  The  whole  weight  of  their  being 
lies  outside  economics  and  politics  and  all  other  facts  of  “this  world.’*  We  see 
it  in  Jesus’s  times  and  St,  Bernard’s  and  in  the  Russian  soul  of  to-day;  we  see  it 
too  in  the  way  of  life  of  a Diogenes  and  a Kant.  For  its  sake  men  choose  volun- 
tary poverty  and  itinerancy  and  hide  themselves  in  cells  and  studies.  Economic 
activity  is  never  found  in  a religion  or  a philosophy,  always  only  in  the  political 
organism  of  a church  or  the  social  organism  of  a theorizing  fellowship;  it  is  ever 
a compromise  with  “this  world**  and  an  index  of  the  presence  of  a will-to- 
power.2 

n 

That  which  may  be  called  the  economic  life  of  the  plant  is  accomplished  on 
and  in  it  without  its  being  itself  anything  but  the  theatre  and  will-less  object  of 
a natural  process.^  This  element  underlies  the  economy  of  the  human  body  also, 
still  unalterably  vegetal  and  dreamy,  pursuing  its  will-less  (in  this  respect  almost 
alien)  existence  in  the  shape  of  the  circulatory  organs.  But  when  we  come  to 
the  animal  body  freely  mobile  in  space,  being  is  not  alone  •—  it  is  accompanied 
by  waking-being,  the  comprehending  apprehension,  and,  therefore,  the  com- 
pulsion to  provide  by  independent  thought  for  the  preservation  of  life.  Here  begins 
t^egotium”  (by  which  is  meant  every  form  of  gainful  activity;  business  is  commercium)  **negat 
otium  ne^ue  quarit  veram  quietsm  qua  est  deus,'*  arc  the  words  of  the  Decretum  Gratiani  Qd.  p.  77). 

^ Pilate’s  question  settles  also  the  relation  of  economy  to  science.  The  religious  man  will  always 
try  in  vain,  catechism  in  hand,  to  improve  the  instincts  of  his  political  environment-  But  it  goes 
on  its  way  undisturbed  and  leaves  him  to  his  thoughts.  The  saint  can  only  choose  between  adapting 
himself  to  this  environment  — and  then  he  becomes  a Church  politician  and  conscienceless  — and 
fleeing  from  it  into  a hermitage  or  even  into  the  Beyond.  But  the  same  happens  also  — and  here 
not  without  a comic  side  to  it  — in  the  intellcctualistn  of  the  city.  The  philosopher  who  has  built 
up  an  ethical-social  system  that  is  replete  with  virtue  and  (of  course}  the  only  true  one,  may  en- 
lighten the  economic  life  as  to  how  it  should  behave  and  at  what  it  should  aim.  It  is  even  the  same 
spectacle,  whether  labelled  liberal,  anarchistic,  or  socialistic,  or  derived  from  Plato,  Proudhon,  or 
Marx.  Here,  too,  economy  carries  on  undisturbed  and  leaves  the  thinker  to  choose  between  with- 
drawing to  pour  out  on  paper  his  lamentations  of  this  world,  and  entering  it  as  an  economic 
politician,  in  which  case  he  cither  makes  himself  ridiculous,  or  else  promptly  throws  his  theory  to 
the  devil  and  starts  to  win  himself  a leading  place. 

® Sec  pp.  I,  et  scq. 


474  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

lifc-anxicty,  leading  to  touch  and  scent,  sight  and  hearing  with  ever-sharpcr 
senses;  and  presently  to  movements  in  space  for  the  purpose  of  searching, 
gathering,  pursuing,  tricking,  stealing,  which  develop  in  many  species  of 
animals  (such  as  beavers,  ants,  bees,  numerous  birds  and  beasts  of  prey)  into  a 
rudimentary  economy-technique  which  presupposes  a process  of  reflection 
and,  therefore,  a certain  emancipation  of  understanding  from  sensation.  Man 
is  genuinely  man  inasmuch  as  his  understanding  has  freed  itself  from  sensation 
and,  as  thought,  intervened  creatively  in  the  relations  between  microcosm  and 
macrocosm.^  Quite  animal  still  is  the  trickery  of  woman  towards  man,  and 
equally  so  the  peasant’s  shrewdness  in  obtaining  small  advantages  — both 
differing  in  no  wise  from  the  slyness  of  the  fox,  both  consisting  in  the  ability 
to  see  into  the  secret  of  the  victim  at  one  glance.  But  on  the  top  of  this  there 
supervenes,  now,  the  economic  thought  that  sows  a field,  tames  animals,  changes 
and  appreciates  and  exchanges  things,  and  finds  a thousand  ways  and  means  of 
better  preserving  life  and  transforming  a dependence  upon  the  environment  into 
a mastery  over  it.  That  is  the  underlayer  of  all  Cultures.  Race  makes  use  of  an 
economic  thought  that  can  become  so  powerful  as  to  detach  itself  from  given 
purposes,  build  up  castles  of  abstraction,  and  finally  lose  itself  in  Utopian  ex- 
panses. 

All  higher  economic  life  develops  itself  on  and  over  a peasantry.  Peasantry, 
pf  does  not  presuppose  any  basis  but  itself.^  It  is,  so  to  say,  race-in-itself, 
plantlike  and  historyless,^  producing  and  using  wholly  for  itself,  with  an  out- 
look on  the  world  that  sweepingly  regards  every  other  economic  existence  as  in- 
cidental and  contemptible.  To  this  producing  kind  of  economy  there  is  presently 
opposed  an  acquisitive  kind,  which  makes  use  of  the  former  as  an  ob  ject  — as  a 
source  of  nourishment,  tribute,  or  plunder.  Politics  and  trade  are  in  their  be- 
ginnings quite  inseparable,  both  being  masterful,  personal,  warlike,  both  with 
a hunger  for  power  and  booty  that  produces  quite  another  outlook  upon  the 
world  — an  outlook  not  from  an  angle  into  it,  but  from  above  down  on  its 
tempting  disorder,  an  outlook  which  is  pretty  candidly  expressed  in  the  choice 
of  the  lion  and  the  bear,  the  hawk  and  the  falcon,  as  armorial  badges.  Primitive 
war  is  always  also  booty-war,  and  primitive  trade  intimately  related  to  plunder 
and  piracy.  The  Icelandic  sagas  narrate  how,  often,  the  Vikings  would  agree 
with  a town  population  for  a market-peace  of  a fortnight,  after  which  weapons 
were  drawn  and  booty-making  started. 

Politics  and  trade  in  developed  form  — the  art  of  achieving  material  suc- 
cesses over  an  opponent  by  means  of  intellectual  superiority  — are  both  a 
replacement  of  war  by  other  means.  Every  kind  of  diplomacy  is  of  a business 

2 Exactly  the  same  is  true  of  wandering  bands  of  hunters  and  pastorals.  But  the  economic  founda- 
tion of  the  great  Culture  is  always  a mankind  that  adheres  fast  to  the  soil,  and  nourishes  and  supports 
the  higher  economic  forms. 

® Sec  p.  331. 


MONEY  475 

nature,  every  business  of  a diplomatic,  and  both  are  based  upon  penetrative 
judgment  of  men  and  physiognomic  tact.  The  adventure-spirit  in  great  seafarers 
like  the  Phoenicians,  Etruscans,  Normans,  Venetians,  Hanseatics,  the  spirit  of 
shrewd  banking-lords  like  the  Fugger  and  the  Medici  and  of  mighty  financiers 
like  Grassus  and  the  mining  and  trust  magnates  of  our  own  day,  must  possess  the 
strategic  talent  of  the  general  if  its  operations  are  to  succeed.  Pride  in  the 
clan-house,  the  paternal  heritage,  the  family  tradition,  develops  and  counts  in 
the  economic  sphere  as  in  the  political;  the  great  fortunes  are  like  the  kingdoms 
and  have  their  history,^  and  Polycrates  and  Solon,  Lorenzo  de'  Medici  and 
Jurgen  Wullenweber  are  far  from  being  the  only  examples  of  political  ambitions 
developing  out  of  commercial. 

But  the  genuine  prince  and  statesman  wants  to  rule,  and  the  genuine  mer- 
chant only  wants  to  be  wealthy,  and  here  the  acquisitive  economy  divides  to 
pursue  aim  and  means  separately.^  One  may  aim  at  booty  for  the  sake  of  power, 
or  at  power  for  the  sake  of  booty.  The  great  ruler,  too,  the  Hwang-ti,  the 
Tiberius,  the  Frederick  II  — has  the  will  to  wealth,  the  will  to  be  “rich  in  land 
and  subjects,’’  but  it  is  with  and  under  a sense  of  high  responsibilities.  A man 
may  lay  hands  on  the  treasurers  of  the  whole  world  with  a good  conscience, 
not  to  say  as  a matter  of  course:  he  may  lead  a life  of  radiant  splendour  or  even 
dissipation  — if  only  he  feels  himself  (Napoleon,  Cecil  Rhodes,  the  Roman  Senate 
of  the  third  century)  to  be  the  engine  of  a mission.  When  he  feels  so,  the  idea  of 
private  property  can  scarcely  be  said  to  exist  so  far  as  he  is  concerned. 

He  who  is  out  for  purely  economic  advantages  — as  the  Carthaginians  were 
in  Roman  times  and,  in  a far  greater  degree  still,  the  Americans  in  ours  — is 
correspondingly  incapable  of  purely  political  thinking.  In  the  decisions  of  high 
politics  he  is  ever  deceived  and  made  a tool  of,  as  the  case  of  Wilson  shows  — 
especially  when  the  absence  of  statesmanlike  instinct  leaves  a chair  vacant 
for  moral  sentiments.  This  is  why  the  great  economic  groupings  of  the  present 
day  (for  example,  employers*  and  employees’  unions)  pile  one  political  failure 
on  another,  unless  indeed  they  find  a real  political  politician  as  leader,  and 
he  — makes  use  of  them.  Economic  and  political  thinking,  in  spite  of  a high 
degree  of  consonance  of  form,  are  in  direction  (and  therefore  in  all  tactical  details) 
basically  different.  Great  business  successes  ® awaken  an  unbridled  sense  of 
-puhlic  power  — in  the  very  word  “capital”  one  catches  an  unmistakable  under- 
tone of  this.  But  it  is  only  in  a few  individuals  that  the  colour  and  direction  of 
their  willing  and  their  criteria  of  situations  of  things  undergo  change.  Only 

^ Undershaft  in  Shaw’s  Major  Barbara  is  a true  ruler-figure  of  this  realm. 

^ P.  344.  As  a means  for  governments  it  is  called  finance-economy  (financial  policy).  Here 
the  whole  nation  is  the  object  of  a levy  of  tribute,  in  the  forms  of  taxes  and  customs,  of  which  the 
purpose  is  not  to  make,  so  to  say,  the  upkeep  of  its  life  more  comfortable,  but  to  secure  its  historical 
position  and  to  enhance  its  power. 

^ Using  the  phrase  widely,  as  including,  for  instance,  the  rise  of  workmen,  journalists,  and  men 
of  learning  to  positions  of  leadership. 


476  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

when  a man  has  really  ceased  to  feel  his  enterprise  as  “his  own  business/*  and 
its  aim  as  the  simple  amassing  of  property,  does  it  become  possible  for  the 
captain  of  industry  to  become  the  statesman,  the  Cecil  Rhodes.  But,  conversely, 
the  men  of  the  political  world  are  exposed  to  the  danger  of  their  will  and 
thought  for  historical  tasks  degenerating  into  mere  provision  for  their  private 
life-upkeep;  then  a nobility  can  become  a robber-order,  and  we  see  emerging  the 
familiar  types  of  princes  and  ministers,  demagogues  and  revolution-heroes, 
whose  zeal  exhausts  itself  in  lazy  comfortableness  and  the  piling-up  of  immense 
riches  - — there  is  little  to  choose  in  this  respect  between  Versailles  and  the 
Jacobin  Club,  business  bosses  and  trade-union  leaders,  Russian  governors  and 
Bolshevists.  And  in  the  maturity  of  democracy  the  politics  of  those  who  have 
“ got  there**  is  identical,  not  merely  with  business,  but  with  speculative  business 
of  the  dirtiest  great-city  sort. 

All  this,  however,  is  the  very  manifestation  of  the  hidden  course  of  a high 
Culture.  In  the  beginning  appear  the  primary  orders,  nobility  and  priesthood, 
with  their  symbolism  of  Time  and  Space.  The  political  life,  like  the  religious 
experience,  has  its  fixed  place,  its  ordained  adepts,  and  its  allotted  aims  for 
facts  and  truths  alike,  in  a well-ordered  society,^  and  down  below,  the  economic 
life  moves  unconscious  along  a sure  path.  Then  the  stream  of  being  becomes 
entangled  in  the  stone  structures  of  the  town,  and  intellect  and  money  thence- 
forward take  over  its  historical  guidance.  The  heroic  and  the  saintly  with  their 
youthful  symbolic  force  become  rarer,  and  withdraw  into  narrower  and  narrower 
circles.  Cool  bourgeois  clarity  takes  their  place.  At  bottom,  the  concluding 
of  a system  and  the  concluding  of  a deal  call  for  one  and  the  same  kind  of 
professional  intelligence.  Scarcely  dijSferentiated  now  by  any  measure  of 
symbolic  force,  political  and  economic  life,  religious  and  scientific  experience 
make  each  other*s  acquaintance,  jostle  one  another,  commingle.  In  the  frictions 
of  the  city  the  stream  of  being  loses  its  strict  rich  form.  Elementary  economic 
factors  come  to  the  surface  and  interplay  with  the  remains  of  form-imbued 
politics,  just  as  sovereign  science  at  the  same  time  adds  religion  to  its  stock  of 
objects.  Over  a life  of  economics  political  self-satisfaction  spreads  a critical- 
edifying  world-sentiment.  But  out  of  it  all  emerge,  in  place  of  the  decayed 
Estates,  the  individual  life-courses,  big  with  true  political  or  religious  force, 
that  are  to  become  destiny  for  the  whole. 

And  thus  we  begin  to  discern  the  morphology  of  economic  history.  First 
there  is  a primitive  economy  of  “man,**  which  — like  that  of  plants  and  animals 
— follows  a biological  ^ time-scale  in  the  development  of  its  forms.  It  com- 
pletely dominates  the  primitive  age,  and  it  continues  to  move  on,  infinitely 
slowly  and  confusedly,  underneath  and  between  the  high  Cultures.  Animals 
and  plants  are  brought  into  it  and  transformed  by  taming  and  breeding,  selection 

^ R 331- 


MONEY  477 

and  sowing;  fire  and  metals  are  exploited,  and  the  properties  of  inorganiG 
nature  made  by  technical  processes  serviceable  for  the  conduct  of  life.  All  this 
is  perfused  with  political-religious  ethic  and  meaning,  without  its  being  possible 
distinctly  to  separate  Totem  and  Taboo,  hunger,  soul-fear,  sex-love,  art,  war, 
sacrificial  rites,  belief,  and  experience. 

Wholly  different  from  this,  both  in  idea  and  in  evolution,  and  sharply 
marked  off  in  tempo  and  duration,  are  the  economic  histories  of  the  high  Cultures ^ 
each  of  which  has  its  own  economic  style.  To  feudalism  belongs  the  economy 
of  the  townless  countryside.  With  the  State  ruled  radially  from  cities  appears 
the  urban  economy  of  money,  and,  this  rises,  with  the  oncoming  of  the  Civiliza- 
tion, into  the  dictature  of  money,  simultaneously  with  the  victory  of  world-city 
democracy.  Every  Culture  has  its  own  independently  developed  form-world. 
Bodily  money  of  the  Apollinian  style  (that  is,  the  stamped  coin)  is  as  anti- 
thetical to  relational  money  of  the  Faustian-dynamic  style  (that  is,  the  booking 
of  credit-units)  as  the  Polis  is  to  the  State  of  Charles  V.  But  the  economic  life, 
just  like  the  social,  forms  itself  pyramidally.^  In  the  rustic  underground  a 
thoroughly  primitive  condition  maintains  itself  almost  unaffected  by  the  Cul- 
ture. The  Late  urban  economy,  which  is  already  the  activity  of  a resolute 
minority,  looks  down  with  steady  contempt  upon  the  pristine  land-economy 
that  continues  all  around  it,  while  the  latter  in  turn  glares  sulkily  at  the  intel- 
lectualized  style  that  prevails  within  the  walls.  Finally  the  cosmopolis  brings 
in  a Civilized  world-economy,  which  radiates  from  very  small  nuclei  within  a 
few  centres,  and  subjects  the  rest  to  itself  as  a provincial  economy,  while  in 
the  remoter  landscapes  thoroughly  primitive  (“patriarchar’)  custom  often 
prevails  still.  With  the  growth  of  the  cities  the  way  of  life  becomes  ever  more 
artificial,  subtle  and  complex.  The  great-city  worker  of  Cassar’s  Rome,  of 
Haroun-al-Raschid*s  Baghdad,  and  of  the  present-day  Berlin  feels  as  self- 
evidently  necessary  much  that  the  richest  yeoman  deep  in  the  country  regards 
as  silly  luxury,  but  this  self-evident  standard  is  hard  to  reach  and  hard  to  main- 
tain. In  every  Culture  the  quantum  of  work  grows  bigger  and  bigger  till  at  the 
beginning  of  every  Civilization  we  find  an  inten'sity  of  economic  life,  of  which 
the  tensions  are  even  excessive  and  dangerous,  and  which  it  is  impossible  to 
maintain  for  a long  period.  In  the  end  a rigid,  permanent-set  condition  is 
reached,  a strange  hotch-potch  of  refined-intellectual  and  crude-primitive 
factors,  such  as  the  Greeks  found  in  Egypt  and  we  have  found  in  modern  India 
and  China  — unless,  of  course,  the  crust  is  being  disintegrated  from  below  by 
the  pressure  of  a young  Culture,  like  the  Classical  in  Diocletian’s  time. 

Relatively  to  this  economic  movement,  men  are  economically  “in  form” 
as  an  economic  class^  just  as  they  are  in  form  for  world-history  as  a political 
Estate.  Each  individual  has  an  economic  position  within  the  economic  order  just 
as  he  has  a grade  of  some  sort  in  the  society.  Now,  both  these  kinds  of  allegiances 

^ See  pp.  172.  and  iSo. 


478  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

make  claims  upon  the  feelings,  thoughts,  and  relations  all  at  once.  A life 
insists  on  being,  and  on  meaning  something  as  well,  and  the  confusion  of  out 
ideas  is  made  worse  confounded  by  the  fact  that,  to-day,  as  in  Hellenistic  times, 
political  parties,  in  their  desire  to  ameliorate  the  upkeep-stzndzrds  of  certain 
economic  groups,  have  elevated  these  groups  to  the  dignity  of  a political 
Estate,  as  Marx,  for  instance,  elevated  the  class  of  factory-workers. 

Confusion  — for  the  first  and  genuine  Estate  is  nobility.  From  it  the  officer 
and  the  judge  and  all  concerned  in  the  highest  duties  of  government  and  ad- 
ministration are  direct  derivatives.  They  are  Estate-like  formations  that 
mean  something.  So,  too,  the  body  of  scholars  and  scientists  belongs  to  the 
priesthood  ^ and  has  a very  sharply  definite  kind  of  class-exclusiveness.  But  the 
grand  symbolism  of  the  Estates  goes  out  with  castle  and  cathedral.  The  Tiers ^ 
already,  is  the  Non-Estate,  the  remainder,  a miscellaneous  and  manifold  con- 
geries, which  means  very  little  as  such  save  in  the  moments  of  political  protest, 
so  that  the  importance  it  creates itself  is  a party  importance.  The  individual 
is  conscious  of  himself  not  as  a bourgeois,  but  because  he  is  a “ liberal*'  and  thus 
part  and  parcel  of  a great  thing,  not  indeed  as  representing  it  in  his  person,  but 
as  adhering  to  it  from  conviction.  In  consequence  of  this  weakness  of  its  social 
** form, " the  economic  “form**  of  the  bourgeoisie  becomes  all  the  more  rela- 
tively conspicuous  in  its  callings,  guilds  and  unions.  In  the  cities,  at  any  rate, 
a man  is  primarily  designated  according  to  the  way  in  which  he  makes  his 
living. 

Economically,  the  first  (and  anciently  almost  the  only)  mode  of  life  is  that 
of  the  peasant, 2 which  is  pure  production,  and  therefore  the  pre-condition  of 
every  other  mode.  Even  the  primary  Estates,  too,  in  early  times,  base  their 
way  of  life  entirely  upon  hunting,  stock-keeping,  and  agricultural  landowning, 
and  even  in  Late  periods  land  is  regarded  by  nobles  and  priests  as  the  only 
truly  honourable  kind  of  property.  In  opposition  to  it  stands  trade,  the  mode 
of  the  SicqnisitiYC  middleman  or  intervener,^  powerful  out  of  all  proportion  to  its 
numbers,  already  indispensable  even  in  quite  early  conditions  — a refined 
parasitism,  completely  unproductive  and,  therefore,  land-alien  and  far-ranging, 
“free,**  and  unhampered  spiritually,  too,  by  the  ethic  and  the  practice  of  the 
countryside,  a life  sustaining  itself  on  another  life.  Between  the  two,  now, 
a third  kind  of  economy,  the  preparatory  economy  of  technics,  grows  up  in  num- 
berless crafts,  industries,  and  callings,  which  creatively  apply  reflections  upon 

1 Including  the  medical  profession,  which  indeed  is  indistinguishable  in  primitive  times  from 
the  priests  and  magicians, 

^ Herdsmen,  fishermen,  and  hunters  included.  There  is,  moreover,  a strange  and  very  profound 
relation  between  peasant  and  miner,  evidenced  in  ancient  sagas  and  rites.  The  metals  are  coaxed 
out  of  the  shaft  as  the  corn  out  of  the  earth,  and  the  game  out  of  the  thicket.  And  for  the  real 
miner  even  metal  is  something  that //W  and  grows. 

5 This  is  true  from  the  earliest  sea-voyaging  to  the  Bourse  of  the  world-city,  and  all  traffic, 
whether  by  river,  road,  or  rail  belongs  withit. 


MONEY  479 

nature  and  whose  honour  and  conscience  are  bound  up  in  achievement,^  Its 
oldest  guild,  which  reaches  back  into  the  sheer  primitive  and  fills  the  picture 
of  this  primitive  with  its  dark  sagas  and  rites  and  notions,  is  the  guild  of  the 
smiths,  who  ^ — as  the  result  of  their  proud  aloofness  from  the  peasantry  and 
the  fear  that  hangs  about  them,  and  leads  to  their  being  venerated  and  banned 
by  turns  — have  often  become  true  tribes  with  a race  of  their  own,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  Abyssinian  Falasha  or  Black  Jews/*^ 

In  these  three  economics  of  production,  preparation,  and  distribution,  as  in 
everything  else  belonging  to  politics  and  life  at  large,  there  are  ths  subjects  and 
objects  of  leading  — in  this  whole  groups  that  dispose,  decide,  orgaiike, 
discover;  and  other  whole  groups  whose  function  is  simply  to  execute.  The 
grading  may  be  hard  and  definite  or  it  may  be  scarcely  perceptible,^  promotion 
may  be  impossible  or  unimpeded,  the  relative  dignity  of  the  task  may  be  almost 
equal  throughout  a long  scale  of  slow  transitions  or  different  beyond  com- 
parison. Tradition  and  law,  talent  and  possessions,  population  numbers, 
cultural  level,  and  economic  situation  may  effectively  override  this  basic 
antithesis  of  subjects  and  objects  — but  it  exists,  it  is  as  much  a premiss  as  life 
itself,  and  it  is  unalterable.  Nevertheless,  tconomicdllj  there  is  no  worker-class; 
that  is  an  invention  of  theorists  who  have  fixed  their  eyes  on  the  position  of 
factory-workers  in  England  — an  industrial,  peasantless  land  in  a transitional 
phase  — and  then  extended  the  resultant  scheme  so  confidently  over  all  the 
Cultures  and  all  the  ages  that  the  politicians  have  taken  it  up  and  used  it  as  a 
means  of  building  themselves  parties.  In  actuality  there  is  an  almost  uncount- 
able number  of  purely  serving  activities  in  workshop  and  counting-houses,  ofiice 
and  cargo-deck,  roads,  mine-shafts,  fields,  and  meadows.  This  counting-up, 
pottering,  running  of  errands,  hammering,  serving,  and  minding  often  enough 
lacks  that  element  which  elevates  life  above  mere  upkeep  and  invests  work  with 
the  dignity  and  the  delight  attaching,  for  example,  to  the  status-duties  of 
the  officer  and  the  savant,  or  the  personal  triumphs  of  the  engineer,  the  man- 
ager, and  the  merchant  — ■ but,  even  apart  from  that,  all  these  things  are  quite 

^ With  this  belong  the  machine  industry,  with  its  purely  Western  type  of  the  inventor  and  engi- 
neer, and  practically,  also,  a great  part  of  the  modern  agronomy,  as,  for  instance,  in  America. 

2 Even  to-day  the  mining  and  metal  industries  are  felt  to  be  somehow  nobler  than,  for  example, 
the  chemical  and  electrical.  They  possess  the  most  ancient  patent  of  nobility  in  the  technical  world, 
and  a relic  of  cult-mystery  lies  over  them. 

^ That  is,  up  to  the  limit  of  servage  and  slavery,  although  very  often  — as  in  the  present-day 
East  and  as  in  Rome  in  the  case  of  “ vernas”  — slavery  itself  may  be  nothing  but  a form  of  com- 
pulsory-labour contract  and,  apart  from  that,  hardly  sensible.  The  free  employee  often  lives  in  far 
stricter  subjection  and  enjoys  far  less  respect,  and  his  formal  right  to  “give  notice  ” is  in  many  cases 
practically  valueless  to  him, 

[British  readers  will  recall  in  this  connexion  the  “Chinese  slavery  “ controversy  in  South  Africa 
in  1904,  and  the  questions  of  indentured  labour  that  come  to  the  surface  not  infrequently  in  Australian 
politics.  And  in  an  older  generation  defenders  of  slavery  as  practised  in  the  sugar  islands  of  the 
West  Indies  arc  still  to  be  found  not  to  mention  the  survivors  and  tradition-bearers  of  the  “Old 
South”  in  the  United  States- — Tf.] 


48o'  ■ : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

incapable  of  being  compared  amongst  themselves.  The  brain  or  brawn  of  the 
work,  its  situation  in  village  or  in  megalopolis,  the  duration  and  intensity  of 
the  doing  of  it,  bring  it  to  pass  that  farm-labourers,  bank  clerks,  and  tailors* 
hands  live  in  perfectly  different  economic  worlds,  and  it  is  only,  I repeat,  the 
party  politics  of  quite  Late  phases  that  lures  them  by  means  of  catchwords  into 
a protest-combination,  with  the  intention  of  making  use  of  its  aggregate  mass. 
The  classical  slave,  on  the  contrary,  is  such  chiefly  in  terms  of  constitutional 
law  — that  is,  so  far  as  the  body-Polis  was  concerned,  he  simply  did  not  exist  ^ 

but  economically  he  might  be  land-worker  or  craftsman,  or  even  director  or 
wholesale  merchant  with  a huge  capital  (peculium),  with  palaces  and  country 
villas  and  a host  of  subordinates  — freemen  included.  And  what  he  could 
become,  over  and  above  this,  in  late  Roman  times  will  appear  in  the  sequel. 

Ill 

With  the  oncoming  of  Spring  there  begins  in  every  Culture  an  economic  life 
of  settled  form.^  The  life  of  the  population  is  entirely  that  of  the  peasant  on  the 
open  land-  The  experience  of  the  town  has  not  yet  come.  All  that  elevates 
itself  from  amongst  the  villages,  castles,  palaces,  monasteries,  temple-closes, 
is  not  a city,  but  a market,  2,  mere  meeting-point  of  yeomen’s  interests,  which 
also  acquired,  and  at  once,  a certain  religious  and  political  meaning,  but  cer- 
tainly cannot  be  said  to  have  had  a special  life  of  its  own.  The  inhabitants, 
even  though  they  might  be  artisans  or  traders,  would  still  feel  as  peasants,  and 
even  in  one  way  or  another  work  as  such. 

That  which  separates  out  from  a life  in  which  everyone  is  alike  producer  and 
consumer  is  goods,  and  traffic  in  goods  is  the  mark  of  all  early  intercourse,  whether 
the  object  be  brought  from  the  far  distance  or  merely  shifted  about  within  the 
limits  of  the  village  or  even  the  farm.  A piece  of  goods  is  that  which  adheres 
by  some  quiet  threads  of  its  essence  to  the  life  that  has  produced  it  or  the  life 
that  uses  it.  A peasant  drives  “his”  cow  to  market,  a woman  puts  away 
“ her”  finery  in  the  cupboard-  We  say  that  a man  is  endowed  with  this  world’s 
“goods”;  the  word  possession  ^ takes  us  back  right  into  the  plantlike  origin 
of  property,  into  which  this  particular  being  — no  other  — has  grown,  from 
the  roots  up.®  Exchange  in  these  periods  is  a process  whereby  goods  pass  from 
one  circle  of  life  into  another.  They  are  valued  with  reference  to  life,  according 
to  a sliding-scale  of  felt  relation  to  the  moment.  There  is  neither  a conception 
of  value  nor  a kind  or  amount  of  goods  that  constitutes  a general  measure  — 

1 P.  60. 

2 Wc  know  this  accurately  for  the  Egyptian  and  the  Gothic  beginnings,  and  in  general  terms  for 
the  Chinese  and  the  Classical;  as  for  the  economic  peudomorf hosts  of  the  Arabian  (see  pp.  189,  et  seq., 
349)  it  may  be  summarized,  after  Hadrian,  as  a process  of  disintegration  of  the  highly  civilized  Classi- 
cal money-economy  culminating  in  the  appearance,  under  Diocletian,  of  a Springtime  barter-economy 
with,  in  the  East,  the  true  Magian  clement  of  bargaining  visibly  superposed. 


MONEY  481 

for  gold  atid  coin  are  goods  too,  whose  rarity  and  indestructibility  causes  them 
to  be  highly  priced. ^ 

Into  the  rhythm  and  course  of  this  barter  the  dealer  only  comes  as  an  in- 
tervener. ^ In  the  market  the  acquisitive  and  the  creative  economies  encounter 
one  another,  but  even  at  places  where  fleets  and  caravans  unload,  trade  only 
appears  as  the  organ  of  countryside  traffic.^  It  is  the  “eternal ’ ’ form  of  economy, 
and  is  even  to-day  seen  in  the  immemorially  ancient  figure  of  the  pedlar  of  the 
country  districts  remote  from  towns,  and  in  out-of-the-way  suburban  lanes 
where  small  barter-circles  form  naturally,  and  in  the  private  economy  of  sa- 
vants, officials,  and  in  general  everyone  not  actively  part  of  the  daily  economic 
life  of  the  great  city. 

With  the  soul  of  the  town  a quite  other  kind  of  life  awakens.^  As  soon  as 
the  market  has  become  the  town,  it  is  not  longer  a question  of  mere  centres  for 
goods-streams  traversing  a purely  peasant  landscape,  but  of  a second  world 
within  the  walls,  for  which  the  merely  producing  life  “out  there”  is  nothing 
but  object  and  means,  and  out  of  which  another  stream  begins  to  circle.  The 
decisive  point  is  this — the  true  urban  man  is  not  a producer  in  the  prime  terrene 
sense.  He  has  not  the  inward  linkage  with  soil  or  with  the  goods  that  pass 
through  his  hands.  He  does  not  live  with  these,  but  looks  at  them  from  out- 
side and  appraises  them  in  relation  to  his  own  life-upkeep. 

With  this  goods  become  wares,  exchange  turnover,  and  in  place  of  thinking  in 
goods  wt  have  thinking  in  money . 

With  this  a purely  extensional  something,  a form  of  limit-defining,  is  ab- 
stracted from  the  visible  objects  of  economics  just  as  mathematical  thought 
abstracts  something  from  the  mechanistically  conceived  environment.  Abstract 

^ Neither  the  copper  pieces  of  the  Italian  Villanova-gravcs  of  early  Homeric  times  (Wiliers 
Gmh.  d,  rom,  Kufferprdgung,  p.  18)  nor  the  early  Chinese  bronze  coins  in  the  form  of  women’s 
drapery  bells,  rings,  or  knives  China,  p.  504)  arc  described  as  money,  but  quite 

distinctly  symbols  of  goods.  And  the  coins  struck  by  the  governments  of  early  Gothic  times  (in 
imitation  of  the  Classical)  as  signs  of  sovereignty  figured  in  economic  life  only  as  wares;  a piece  of 
gold  is  worth  as  much  as  a cow, 

2 Hence  it  is  that  so  often  he  is  not  an  outcome  of  the  fixed  and  self-contained  life  of  the  country- 
side, but  an  alien  appearing  in  it,  an  alien  having  neither  importance  nor  antecedents.  This  is  the 
r61e  of  the  Phoenicians  in  the  earliest  period  of  the  Classical;  of  the  Romans  in  the  East  in  Mithra- 
dates’s  time;  of  the  Jews,  and  with  them  Byzantines,  Persians,  and  Armenians,  in  the  Gothic  West; 
of  the  Arabs  in  the  Sudan;  of  the  Indians  in  East  Africa;  and  of  the  West-Europeans  in  present-day 
Russia. 

® And,  consequently,  on  a very  small  scale.  As  foreign  trade  was  in  those  days  highly  ad- 
venturous and  appealed  to  the  imagination,  it  was  as  a rule  immensely  exaggerated.  The  “great” 
merchants  of  Venice  and  the  Hansa  about  1300  were  hardly  the  equals  of  the  more  distinguis-hed 
craftsmen.  The  turnover  of  even  the  Medici  or  the  Fugger  about  1400  was  equivalent  to  that  of  a 
shop-business  in  a small  town  to-day.  The  largest  merchant  vessels,  in  which  usually  several  traders 
held  part  shares,  were  much  smaller  than  modern  German  river-barges,  and  made  only  one  consider- 
able voyage  each  year.  The  celebrated  wool-^ncpbrt  of  England,  a main  element  of  Hanseatic  trade, 
amounted  about  layo  to  hardly  as  much  as  the  contents  of  two  modern  goods-trains  (Sombart,  Der 
moderne  Kaptalismus,  (I,  pp.  2.80,  et  seq.). 

^ P.  91, 


48i:-  ■ : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

money  corresponds  exactly  to  abstract  number.^  Both  are  entirely  inorganic. 
The  economic  picture  is  reduced  exclusively  to  quantities,  whereas  the  important 
point  about  ‘'goods’*  had  been  their  quality.  For  the  early-period  peasant 
“his”  cow  is,  first  of  all,  just  what  it  is,  a unit  being,  and  only  secondarily  an 
object  of  exchange;  but  for  the  economic  outlook  of  the  true  townsman  the 
only  thing  that  exists  is  an  abstract  money-value  which  at  the  moment  happens 
to  be  in  the  shape  of  a cow  that  can  always  be  transformed  into  that  of,  say, 
a bank-note.  Even  so  the  genuine  engineer  sees  in  a famous  waterfall  not  a 
unique  natural  spectacle,  but  just  a calculable  quantum  of  unexploited  energy. 

It  is  an  error  of  all  modern  money-theories  that  they  start  from  the  value- 
token  or  even  the  material  of  the  payment-medium  instead  of  from  the  form  of 
economic  thought.^  In  reality,  money,  like  number  and  law,  is  a caugorj  of 
thought.  There  is  a monetary,  just  as  there  is  a juristic  and  a mathematical  and 
a technical,  thinking  of  the  world-around.  From  the  sense-experience  of  a 
house  we  obtain  quite  different  abstracts,  according  as  we  are  mentally  appraising 
it  from  the  point  of  view  of  a merchant,  a judge,  or  an  engineer,  and  with 
reference  to  a balance-sheet,  a lawsuit,  or  a danger  of  collapse.  Next  of  kin  to 
thinking  in  money,  however,  is  mathematics.  To  think  in  terms  of  business  is 
to  calculate.  The  money-value  is  a numerical  value  measured  by  a unit  of 
reckoning.^  This  exact  “value-in-itself,”  like  number-in-itself,  the  man  of  the 
town,  the  man  without  roots,  is  the  first  to  imagine;  for  peasants  there  are  only 
ephemeral  felt  values  in  relation  to  now  this  and  now  that  object  of  exchange. 
What  he  does  not  use,  or  does  not  want  to  possess,  has  “no  value”  for  him. 
Only  in  the  economy-picture  of  the  real  townsman  are  there  objective  values 
and  kinds  of  values  which  have  an  existence  apart  from  his  private  needs,  as 
thought-elements  of  a generalized  validity,  although  in  actuality  every  indi- 
vidual has  his  proper  system  of  values  and  his  proper  stock  of  the  most  varied 
kinds  of  value,  and  feels  the  ruling  prices  of  the  market  as  “cheap”  or  “dear** 
with  reference  to  these.^ 

Whereas  the  earlier  m.2Lnkmi  compares  goods,  and  does  so  not  by  means  of 
the  reason  only,  the  later  reckons  the  values  of  wares,  and  does  so  by  rigid  un- 

1 a.  Vol.  I,  Ch.  11. 

2 Marks  and  dollars  are  no  more  “money”  than  metres  and  grammes  are  “forces.”  Pwj  of 
money  arc  real  values.  It  is  only  our  ignorance  of  Classical  physics  that  has  saved  us  from  con- 
fusing gravitation  with  a pound- weight  — in  our  mathematics,  with  its  Classical  basis,  we  still 
mix  number  with  magnitude,  and  our  imitation  of  Classical  coinage  has  brought  about  the  same 
confusion  between  money  and  pieces  of  money. 

® Conversely,  therefore,  we  can  call  the  metric  system  (cm.,  g.)  a valuation,  and  in  fact  all 
money-measures  proceed  from  the  weight  theories  of  physics- 

^ Similarly  all  value-theories,  however  objective  they  are  meant  to  be,  are  developed  — and 
inevitably  so  — out  of  a subjective  principle.  That  of  Marx,  for  example,  defines  value  in  the  way 
that  promotes  the  interest  of  the  manual  worker,  the  effort  of  the  discoverer  or  the  organizer  seem- 
ing to  him,  therefore,  valueless.  But  it  would  be  wrong  to  describe  this  as  " erroneous.”  AH  these 
theories  are  “right ” for  their  supporters  and  “wrong”  for  their  opponents,  and  it  is  not  reasons  but 
life  that  settles  whether  one  is  a supporter  or  an  opponent. 


MONEY 


483 

qualitative  measures.  Now  gold  is  no  longer  measured  against  the  cow^  but 
the  cow  against  the  gold,  and  the  result  is  expressed  by  an  abstract  number, 
the  price.  Whether  and  how  this  measure  of  value  finds  symbolic  expression 
in  a value-sign  — as  the  written,  spoken,  or  represented  number-sign  is,  in  a 
sense,  number  — depends  on  the  economic  style  of  the  particular  Culture,  each 
of  which  produces  a different  sort  of  money.  The  common  condition  for  the 
appearance  of  this  is  the  existence  of  an  urban  population  that  thinks  econom- 
ically in  terms  of  it,  and  it  is  its  particular  character  that  settles  whether  the 
value-token  shall  serve  also  as  payment-medium;  thus  the  Classical  coin  and 
■probably  the  Babylonian  silver  did  so  serve,  whereas  the  Egyptian  (raw 
copper  weighed  out  in  pounds)  was  a measure  of  exchange,  but  neither  token 
nor  payment-medium.  The  Western  and  the  “ contemporary”  Chinese  bank- 
note,^ again,  is  a medium,  but  not  a measure.  In  fact  we  are  accustomed  to 
deceive  ourselves  thoroughly  as  to  the  r&le  played  by  coins  of  precious  metal  in 
our  sort  of  economy  ; they  are  just  wares  fashioned  in  imitation  of  the  Classical 
custom,  and  hence,  measured  against  book-values  of  credit  money,  they  have 
a “price.” 

The  outcome  of  this  way  of  thinking  is  that  the  old  possession^  bound  up  with 
life  and  the  soil,  gives  way  to  the  fortune,  which  is  essentially  mobile  and 
qualitatively  undefined:  it  does  not  consist  in  goods,  but  it  is  laid  out  in  them. 
Considered  by  itself,  it  is  a purely  numerical  quantum  of  money-value.® 

As  the  seat  of  this  thinking,  the  city  becomes  the  money-market,  the  centre 
of  values,  and  a stream  of  money- values  begins  to  infuse,  intcllcctnalizc,  and 
command  the  stream  of  goods-  And  with  this  the  trader,  from  being  an  organ  of 
economic  life,  becomes  its  master.  Thinking  in  money  is  always,  in  one  way  or 
another,  trade  or  business  thinking.  It  presupposes  the  productive  economy 
of  the  land,  and,  therefore,  is  always  primarily  acquisitive,  for  there  is  no 
third  course.  The  very  words  “acquisition,”  “gain,”  “speculation,”  point  to 
a profit  tricked  off  from  the  goods  m route  to  the  consumer — an  intellectual 
plunder  — and  for  that  reason  are  inapplicable  to  the  early  peasantry.  Only  by 
attuning  ourselves  exactly  to  the  spirit  and  economic  outlook  of  the  true  towns- 
man can  we  realize  what  they  mean.  He  works  not  for  needs,  but  for  sales,  for 
“ money.  ” The  business  view  gradually  infuses  itself  into  every  kind  of  activity. 
The  countryman,  inwardly  bound  up  with  traffic  in  goods,  was  at  once  giver 
and  taker,  and  even  the  trader  of  the  primitive  market  was  hardly  an  exception 
to  this  rule.  But  with  money-traffic  there  appears  between  producer  and  con- 
sumer, as  though  between  two  separate  worlds,  the  third  party,  the  middleman, 
whose  thought  is  dominated  a priori  by  the  business  side  of  life.  He  forces 
the  producer  to  offer,  and  the  consumer  to  inquire  of  him.  He  elevates  mediation 

^ The  Western  introduced  (on  a very  modest  scale)  by  the  Bank  of  England  from  the  end  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  the  Chinese  dating  from  the  period  of  the  Contending  States. 

® And  is  thought  of  as  “ amount,’"  whereas  we  speak  of  the  “ extent  ” of  a property  in  goods. 


484  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

to  a monopoly  and  thereafter  to  economic  primacy,  and  forces  the  other  two 
to  be  “in  form”  in  his  interest,  to  prepare  the  wares  according  to  his  reckonings, 
and  to  cheapen  them  under  the  pressure  of  his  offers. 

He  who  commands  this  mode  of  thinking  is  the  master  of  money.  ^ In  all 
the  Cultures  evolution  takes  this  road.  Lysias  informs  us  in  his  oration  against 
the  corn-merchants  that  the  speculators  at  the  Piraeus  frequently  spread  reports 
of  the  wreck  of  a grain-fleet  or  of  the  outbreak  of  war,  in  order  to  produce  a 
panic.  In  Hellenistic-Roman  times  it  was  a widespread  practice  to  arrange  for 
land  to  go  out  of  cultivation,  or  for  imports  to  be  held  in  bond,  in  order  to  force 
up  prices.  In  the  Egyptian  New  Empire  wheat-corners  in  the  American  style 
were  made  possible  by  a bill-discounting  that  is  fully  comparable  with  the 
banking  operations  of  the  West.^  Cleomenes,  Alexander  the  Great’s  adminis- 
trator for  Egypt,  was  able  by  book  transactions  to  get  the  whole  corn-supply 
into  his  own  hands,  thereby  producing  a famine  far  and  wide  in  Greece  and 
raking  in  immense  gains  for  himself.  To  think  economically  on  any  terms  but 
these  is  simply  to  become  a mere  pawn  in  the  money-operations  of  the  great 
city.  This  style  of  thought  soon  gets  hold  of  the  waking-consciousness  of  the 
entire  urban  population  and,  therefore,  of  everyone  who  plays  any  serious  part 
in  the  conduct  of  economic  history.  “Peasant”  and  “burgher”  stand  not  only 
for  the  difference  of  country  and  city,  but  for  that  of  possessions  and  money  as 
well.  The  splendid  Culture  of  Homeric  and  Provengal  princely  courts  was 
something  that  waxed  and  waned  with  the  men  themselves  — we  can  often, 
even  to-day,  see  it  in  the  life  of  old  families  in  their  country-seats  — but  the 
more  refined  culture  of  the  bourgeoisie,  its  “comfort,”  is  something  coming 
from  outside,  something  that  can  be  paid  for.^  All  highly  developed  economy 
is  urban  economy.  World-economy  itself,  the  characteristic  economy  of  all 
Civilizations,  ought  properly  to  be  called  world-city-economy.  The  destinies 
even  of  this  world-economy  are  now  decided  in  a few  places,  the  “money- 
markets  of  the  world  ^ — in  Babylon,  Thebes,  and  Rome,  in  Byzantium  and 
Baghdad,  in  London,  New  York,  Berlin,  and  Paris.  The  residue  is  a starveling 
provincial  economy  that  runs  on  in  its  narrow  circles  without  being  conscious 
of  its  utter  dependence.  Finally,  money  is  the  form  of  intellectual  energy  in 
which  the  ruler-will,  the  political  and  social,  technical  and  mental,  creative 
power,  the  craving  for  a full-sized  life,  are  concentrated.  Shaw  is  entirely 
right  when  he  says:  '“The  universal  regard  for  money  is  the  one  hopeful  fact 

1 Even  to  the  modern  pirates  of  the  money-market  who  intervene  amongst  the  interveners  and 
gamble  with  money  as  “wares.” 

^ Prcisigke,  Girowesen  im  griechischen  j£gypfen  (1910).  These  trading  forms  of  the  Ptolemaic  period 
were  already  in  vogue,  and  at  the  same  high  level,  under  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty. 

® So  also  with  the  bourgeois  ideal  of  freedom.  In  theory  and,  therefore,  constitutionally,  a man 
may  be  free  in  principle,  but  actually,  in  the  economic  private-life  of  the  cities,  he  is  made  free  only 
by  money. 

^ The  name  “bourse”  can  be  applied  even  in  other  Cultures,  if  by  that  word  'wc  mean  the 
thought-organ  of  a developed  money-economy. 


MONEY  485 

in  our  dvilmtion  . . , the  two  things  [money  and  life]  are  inseparable: 
money  is  the  counter  that  enables  life  to  be  distributed  socially:  it  « life.  . . 
What  is  here  described  as  Civilization,  then,  is  the  stage  of  a Culture  at  which 
tradition  and  personality  have  lost  their  immediate  effectiveness,  and  every 
idea,  to  be  actualized,  has  to  be  put  into  terms  of  money.  At  the  beginning  a 
man  was  wealthy  because  he  was  powerful  — now  he  is  powerful  because  he 
has  money.  Intellect  reaches  the  throne  only  when  money  puts  it  there. 
Democracy  is  the  completed  equating  of  money  with  political  power. 

Though  the  economic  history  of  every  Culture  there  runs  a desperate  conflict 
waged  by  the  soil-rooted  tradition  of  a race,  by  its  soul^  against  the  spirit  of 
money.  The  peasant-wars  of  the  beginning  of  a Late  period  (in  the  Classical, 
700-500;  in  the  Western,  1450-1650;  in  the  Egyptian,  end  of  Old  Kingdom) 
are  the  first  reaction  of  the  blood  against  the  money  that  is  stretching  forth  its 
hand  from  the  waxing  cities  over  the  soil. ^ Stein’s  warning  that  he  who 
mobilizes  the  soil  dissolves  it  into  dust”  points  to  a danger  common  to  all 
Cultures;  if  money  is  unable  to  attack  possession,  it  insinuates  itself  into  the 
thoughts  of  the  noble  and  peasant  possessors,  until  the  inherited  possession 
that  has  grown  with  the  family’s  growth  begins  to  seem  like  resources  merely 
“put  into”  land  and  soil  and,  so  far  as  their  essence  is  concerned,  mobile.® 
Money  aims  at  mobilizing  all  things.  World-economy  is  the  actualized 
economy  of  values  that  are  completely  detached  in  thought  from  the  land,  and 
made  fluid.^  The  Classical  money-thinking,  from  Hannibal’s  day,  transformed 
whole  cities  into  coin  and  whole  populations  into  slaves  and  thereby  converted 
both  into  money  that  could  be  brought  from  everywhere  to  Rome,  and  used 
outwards  from  Rome  as  a power. 

The  Faustian  money-thinking  “opens  up”  whole  continents,  the  water- 

^ Preface  to  Major  Barbara  (Constable,  London  1909). 

® P.  34?- 

3 The  ‘’farmer”  is  the  man  whose  connexion  with  the  piece  of  land  is  no  longer  anything 
more  than  practical. 

^ The  increasing  intensity  of  this  thinking  appears  in  the  economic  picture  as  a growth  of  the 
available  money-mass,  which  is  abstract  and  imagined  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  visible  supply 
of  gold  as  a ware.  The  “ stiffening  ’ ’ of  the  money-market,  for  example,  is  a purely  intellectual  process 
played  out  in  the  hands  of  a small  handful  of  men.  The  increasing  energy  of  money-thinking  conse- 
quently awakens,  in  every  Culture,  the  feeling  that  the  “value  of  money  is  going  down”  — enor- 
mously so,  for  example,  in  the  time  between  Solon  and  Alexander  — with  reference,  namely,  to  the 
unit  of  calculation.  What  actually  happens  is  that  the  mercantile  units  of  value  have  become  artificial 
and  no  longer  comparable  with  the  primary  and  livingly  experiential  values  of  the  peasant  economy. 
In  the  end  it  ceases  to  matter  in  what  figures  the  Attic  treasure  of  the  Delian  League  (454)  or  the  sums 
involved  in  the  peace-treaties  of  2.41  and  201  j or  the  booty  of  Pompey  in  64  arc  reckoned,  and  whether 
we  ourselves  shall  pass  in  a few  decades  from  the  milliards  — still  unknown  in  1850,  but  common- 
place to-day  — to  the  billions.  There  is  no  common  standard  for  the  value  of  a talent  in  430  and  in 
30  B.c,,  for  gold,  like  cattle  and  corn,  has  continually  altered  not  only  its  own  numeration,  but  its 
significance  within  an  ever-advancing  urban  economy.  The  only  steady  element  is  the  fact  that 
quantity  of  money  — not  to  be  confused  with  the  stock  of  tokens  and  the  means  of  payment  — is 
an  alter  ego  mirroring  thought  in  money. 


486  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

power  of  gigantic  river-basins,  the  muscular  power  of  the  peoples  of  broad 
regions,  the  coal  measures,  the  virgin  forests,  the  laws  of  Nature,  and  transforms 
them  all  into  financial  energy,  which  is  laid  out  in  one  way  or  in  another  — 
in  the  shape  of  press,  or  elections,  or  budgets,  or  armies  — for  the  realization 
of  masters'  plans.  Ever  new  values  are  abstracted  from  whatever  world-stock 
is  still,  from  the  business  point  of  view,  unclaimed,  ‘'the  slumbering  spirits  of 
gold,"  as  John  Gabriel  Borkman  says;  and  what  the  things  themselves  are, 
apart  from  this,  is  of  no  economic  significance  at  all. 

IV 

As  every  Culture  has  its  own  mode  of  thinking  in  money,  so  also  it  has  its 
proper  money-symbol  through  which  it  brings  to  visible  expression  its  principle 
of  valuation  in  the  economic  field.  This  something,  a sense-actualizing  of  the 
thought,  is  in  importance  fully  the  equal  of  the  spoken,  written,  or  drawn  figures 
and  other  symbols  of  the  mathematic.  Here  lies  a deep  and  fruitful  domain  of 
inquiry,  so  far  almost  unexplored.  Not  even  the  basic  notions  have  been  cor- 
rectly enunciated,  and  it  is  therefore  quite  impossible  to-day  to  translate  in- 
telligibly the  money-idea  that  underlay  the  barter  and  the  bill  business  of 
Egypt,  the  banking  of  Babylonia,  the  book-keeping  of  China,  and  the  capitalism 
of  the  Jews,  Parsees,  Greeks,  and  Arabs  from  Haroun-al-Raschid's  day  . All  that 
is  possible  is  to  set  forth  the  essential  opposition  of  Apoliinian  and  Faustian 
money  — the  one,  money  as  magnitude,  and  the  other,  money  as  function ^ 

Economically,  as  in  other  ways,  Classical  man  saw  his  world-around  as  a 
sum  of  bodies  that  changed  their  place,  travelled,  drove  or  hit  or  annihilated 
one  another,  as  in  Democritus’s  description  of  Nature.  Man  was  a body  among 
bodies,  and  the  Polis  as  sum  thereof  a body  of  higher  order.  All  the  needs  of 
life  consisted  in  corporeal  quantities,  and  money,  too,  therefore  represented  such 
a body,  in  the  same  way  as  an  Apollo-statue  represented  a god.  About  650, 
simultaneously  with  the  stone  body  of  the  Doric  temple  and  the  free  statue 
true-modelled  in  the  round,  appeared  the  coin^  a metal  weight  of  beautiful 
impressed  form.  Value  as  a magnitude  had  long  existed  — in  fact  as  long  as 
this  Culture  itself.  In  Homer,  a talent  is  a little  aggregate  of  gold,  in  bullion 
and  decorative  objects,  of  a definite  total  weight.  The  Shield  of  Achilles  repre- 
sents “two  talents"  of  gold,  and  even  as  late  as  Roman  times  it  was  usual  to 
specify  silver  and  gold  vessels  by  weight. 2 

The  discovery  of  the  Classically  formed  money-body,  however,  is  so  extraor- 
dinary that  we  have  not  even  yet  grasped  it  in  its  deep  and  purely  Classical 
significance.  We  regard  it  as  one  of  the  “ achievements  of  humanity,"  and  so 
we  strike  these  coinages  everywhere,  just  as  we  put  statues  in  our  streets  and 
squares.  So  much  and  no  more  it  is  within  our  power  to  do;  we  can  imitate 

Cf.  Vol.  I,  Ch.  IL 

2 Fricdlandcr,  K.dm.  Sittengesch.,  IV  (1911),  p.  301. 


MONEY  487 

the  shape,  but  we  cannot  impart  the  same  economic  significance  thereto.  The 
coin  as  momy  is  a purely  Classical  phenomenon  — only  possible  in  an  environ- 
ment conceived  wholly  on  Euclidean  ideas,  but  there  creatively  dominant 
over  all  economic  life.  Notions  like  income,  resources,  debt,  capital,  meant  in 
the  Classical  cities  something  quite  different  from  what  they  mean  to  us.  They 
meant,  not  economic  energy  radiating  from  a point,  but  a sum  of  valuable 
objects  in  hand.  Wealth  was  always  a mobile  cash-supply,  which  was  altered 
by  addition  and  subtraction  of  valuable  objects  and  had  nothing  at  all  to  do  with 
possessions  in  land  — for  in  Classical  thinking  the  two  were  completely  sepa- 
rate. Credit  consisted  in  the  lending  of  cash  in  the  expectation  that  the  loan 
would  be  repaid  in  cash.  Catiline  was  poor  because,  in  spite  of  his  wide  es- 
states,^  he  could  find  nobody  to  lend  him  the  cash  that  he  needed  for  his  political 
aims;  and  the  immense  debts  of  Roman  politicians  ^ had  for  their  ultimate 
security,  not  their  equivalent  in  land,  but  the  definite  prospect  of  a province  to 
be  plundered  of  its  movable  assets.^ 

In  the  light  of  this,  and  only  in  the  light  of  this,  we  begin  to  understand  cer- 
tain phenomena  such  as  the  mass-execution  of  the  wealthy  under  the  Second 
Tyrannis,  and  the  Roman  proscriptions  (with  the  object  of  seizing  a large  part 
of  the  cash  current  in  the  community),  and  the  melting  down  of  the  Delphian 
temple- treasure  by  the  Phocians  in  the  Sacred  War,  of  the  art-treasures  of 
Corinth  by  Mummius,  and  of  the  last  votive  offerings  in  Rome  by  Caesar,  in 
Greece  by  Sulla,  in  Asia  Minor  by  Brutus  and  Cassius,  without  regard  to  artistic 
value  when  the  noble  stuffs  and  metals  and  ivory  were  needed.^  The  captured 
statues  and  the  vessels  borne  in  the  triumphs  were,  in  the  eyes  of  the  spectators, 
sheer  cash,  and  Mommsen®  could  attempt  to  determine  the  site  of  Varus’s 
disaster  by  the  places  in  which  coin-hoards  were  unearthed  — ^ for  the  Roman 
veteran  carried  his  whole  property  in  precious  metal  on  his  person.  Classical 
wealth  does  not  consist  in  having  possessions,  but  piling  money;  a Classical 
money-market  was  not  a centre  of  credit  like  the  bourses  of  our  world  and  of 

^ Sallust,  35,  3. 

2 p.  458. 

® How  difficult  it  was  for  Classical  man  to  figure  to  himself  the  transformation  of  a physically 
indefinable  asset  like  land  into  bodily  money  is  shown  by  the  stone  posts  (dpot)  on  land  in  Greece, 
which  W'cre  meant  to  npesmt  the  mortgages  on  it,  and  by  the  Roman  method  of  sale  pr  as  et  Ubram^ 
in  which  a clod  of  earth  was  handed  over  for  a coin  in  the  presence  of  witnesses.  Consequently,  trade 
in  goods  (properly  so  called)  never  existed,  nor  anything  like,  for  example,  a current  price  for  arable 
land.  A regular  relation  between  land-value  and  money- value  was  as  unthinkable  to  the  Classical 
mind  as  such  a relation  between  artistic  value  and  money-value.  Intellectual  — i.e.,  incorporeal  — 
products  like  dramas  and  frescoes  possessed  economically  no  value  at  all.  For  the  Classical  idea  of 
law,  cf.  p.  81. 

^ Not  very  much  can  have  been  left  of  Qassical  art-treasures  even  by  Augustus's  time.  The 
refined  Athenians  themselves  thought  far  too  unhistoricaliy  to  be  moved  to  spare  a chryselephantine 
statue  merely  because  it  was  the  work  of  Phidias.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  the  gold  parts  of  the 
famous  Athene-figure  of  the  Parthenon  cclla  were  made  removable  and  tested  for  weight  from  time 
to  time.  Economic  use  of  them,  therefore,  was  provided  for  from  the  outset. 

® Ges.  Sebriften,  IV,  2.00,  ct  seq. 


488.  ^ ^ 

ancient  ThebeSj  but  a city  in  which  an  important  part  of  the  world’s  cash  was 
actually  collected.  It  may  be  taken  that  in  Caesar’s  time  much  more  than  half 
of  the  Classical  world’s  gold  was  in  Rome. 

But  when,  from  about  Hannibal’s  time,  this  world  advanced  into  the  state 
of  unlimited  plutocracy,  the  naturally  limited  mass  of  precious  metals  and 
materially  valuable  works  of  art  in  its  sphere  of  control  became  hopelessly 
inadequate  to  cover  needs,  and  a veritable  craving  set  in  for  new  bodies  capable 
of  being  used  as  money.  Then  it  was  that  men’s  eyes  fell  upon  the  slave,  who 
was  another  sort  of  body,  but  a thing  and  not  a person  ^ and  capable,  therefore, 
of  being  thought  of  as  money.  From  that  point  Classical  slavery  became  unique 
of  its  kind  in  all  economic  history.  The  properties  of  the  coin  were  extended  to 
apply  to  living  objects,  and  the  stock  of  men  in  the  regions  “ opened  up”  to  the 
plunderings  of  proconsuls  and  tax-farmers  became  as  interesting  as  the  stock  of 
metal-  A curious  sort  of  double  valuation  developed.  The  slave  had  a market 
price,  although  ground  and  soil  had  not.  He  served  for  the  accumulation  of 
great  uninvested  fortunes,  and  hence  the  enormous  slave-masses  of  the  Roman 
period,  which  are  entirely  inexplicable  by  any  other  sort  of  necessity.  So  long  as 
man  needed  only  as  many  slaves  as  he  could  gainfully  employ,  their  number  was 
small  and  easily  covered  by  the  prisoners  of  war  and  judgment-debtors.^  It 
was  in  the  sixth  century  that  Chios  made  a beginning  with  the  importation  of 
bought  slaves  (Argyronetes).  The  difference  between  these  and  the  far  more 
numerous  paid  labourers  was  originally  of  a political  and  legal,  not  an  economic 
kind.  As  the  Classical  economy  was  static  and  not  dynamic,  and  was  ignorant 
of  the  systematic  opening-up  of  energy-sources,  the  slaves  of  the  Roman  age 
did  not  exist  to  be  exploited  in  work,  but  were  employed  — more  or  less  — 
so  that  the  greatest  possible  number  of  them  could  be  maintained.  Specially 
presentable  slaves  possessing  particular  qualifications  of  one  sort  or  another  were 
preferred,  because  for  equal  cost  of  maintenance  they  represented  a better  asset; 
they  were  loaned  as  cash  was  loaned;  and  they  were  allowed  to  have  businesses 
on  their  account,  so  that  they  could  become  rich;  ® free  labour  was  undersold 
— all  this  so  as  to  cover  at  any  rate  the  upkeep  of  this  capital.^  The  bulk  of 
them  cannot  have  been  employed  at  all.  They  answered  their  purpose  by  simply 
existing,  as  a stock  of  money  in  hand  which  was  not  bound  up  to  a natural  limit 

600.  ' ■ 

2 The  belief  that  slaves  ever  constituted,  even  in  Athens  or  JEgim,  as  much  as  a third  of  the 
population  is  a complete  delusion.  On  the  contrary,  the  revolutions  of  the  period  after  400  presuppose 
an  enormous  surplus  of  free  paupers. 

® P.  480. 

^ Herein  lies  the  difference  between  this  slavery  and  the  sugar-slavery  of  our  own  Baroque.  The 
latter  represents  a threshold  phase  of  our  machine  industry^  an  organization  of  “ living  ” energy,  which 
began  with  man-fuel,  but  presently  passed  over  to  coal-fuel;  and  slavery  came  to  be  considered 
immoral  only  when  coal  had  established  itself.  Looked  at  from  this  angle,  the  victory  of  the  North 
in  the  American  Civil  War  (1865)  meant  the  economic  victory  of  the  concentrated  energy  of  coal  over 
the  simple  energy  of  the  muscles. 


MONEY  489 

like  the  Stock  of  metal  available  m those  days.  And  through  that  very  fact  the 
need  of  slaves  grew  and  grew  indefinitely  and  led,  not  only  to  wars  that  were 
undertaken  simply  for  slave-getting,  but  to  slave-hunting  by  private  entrepre- 
neurs all  along  the  Mediterranean  coasts  (which  Rome  winked  at)  and  to  a new 
way  of  making  the  proconsuls*  fortunes,  which  consisted  in  bleeding  the 
population  of  a region  and  then  selling  it  into  slavery  for  debt.  The  market  of 
Delos  must  have  dealt  with  ten  thousand  slaves  a day.  When  Cxsar  went  to 
Britain,  the  disappointment  caused  in  Rome  by  the  money-poverty  of  the 
Britons  was  compensated  by  the  prospect  of  rich  booty  in  slaves.  When,  for 
example,  Corinth  was  destroyed,  the  melting-down  of  the  statues  for  coinage 
and  the  auctioning  of  the  inhabitants  at  the  slave-mart  were,  for  Classical  minds, 
one  and  the  same  operation  — the  transformation  of  corporeal  objects  into 
money. 

In  extremest  contrast  to  this  stands  the  symbol  of  Faustian  money  — money 
as  Function,  the  value  of  which  lies  in  its  effect  and  not  its  mere  existence. 
The  specific  style  of  this  economic  thinking  appears  already  in  the  way  in  which 
the  Normans  of  a.d.  1000  organized  their  spoils  of  men  and  land  into  an  eco- 
nomic force. ^ Compare  the  pure  book-valuation  of  these  ducal  officials  (com- 
memorated in  our  words  “cheque,**  “account,**  and  “checking*’)  ^ with 
the  “contemporary**  gold  talent  of  the  Iliad,  one  meets  at  the  very  outset  of 
the  Culture  the  rudiments  of  its  modern  credit-system,  which  is  the  outcome 
of  confidence  in  the  force  and  durability  of  its  economic  mode,  and  with  which 
the  idea  of  money  in  our  sense  is  almost  identical.  These  financial  methods, 
transplanted  to  the  Roman  Kingdom  of  Sicily  by  Roger  II,  were  developed  by 
the  Hohenstaufen  Emperor  Frederick  II  (about  1130)  into  a powerful  system 
far  surpassing  the  original  in  dynamism  and  making  him  the  “first  capitalist 
power  of  the  world  * * ; ® and  while  this  fraternization  of  mathematical  thinking- 
power  and  royal  will-to-power  made  its  way  from  Normandy  into  France  and 
was  applied  on  the  grand  scale  to  the  exploitation  of  conquered  England  (to 
this  day  English  soil  is  nominally  royal  demesne)  its  Sicilian  side  was  imitated 
by  the  Italian  city-republics,  and  (as  their  ruling  patricians  soon  took  the 
methods  of  the  civic  economy  into  use  for  their  private  book-keeping,)  spread 
over  the  commercial  thought  and  practice  of  the  whole  Western  world.  Little 
later,  the  Sicilian  methods  were  adopted  by  the  Order  of  the  Teutonic  Knights 
and  by  the  dynasty  of  Aragon,  and  it  is  probably  to  these  origins  that  we 
should  assign  the  model  accountancy  of  Spain  in  the  days  of  Philip  II,  and  of 
Prussia  in  those  of  Frederick  William  I. 

^ Pp*  et  scq.  The  resemblance  with  the  Egyptian  administration  under  the  Old  Kingdom 
and  the  Chinese  in  the  earliest  Chou  period  is  unmistakable. 

2 The  cUrki  of  these  exchequer  offices  were  the  archetype  of  the  modern  bank-clerk,  Cf.  p-  371. 

® Hampe,  Deutsche  Kaisergeschkhte,  p.  Leonardo  Pisano,  whose  Liher  Abaci  (12.02.^  was 

authoritative  in  accountancy  till  well  beyond  the  Renaissance,  and  who  introduced,  besides 
the  Arabian  system  of  numerals,  negative  numbers  to  indicate  debit,  was  promoted  by  the  great 
Hohenstaufen. 


490  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

The  decisive  event,  hovrever,  was  the  invention  — “contemporary**  with 
that  of  the  Classical  coin  about  650 — of  double-entry  book-keeping  by  Fra 
Luca  Pacioli  in  1494.  Goethe  calls  this  in  Wilhelm  Meister  “ one  of  the  finest 
discoveries  of  the  human  intellect,*’  and  indeed  its  author  may  without  hesi- 
tation be  ranked  with  his  contemporaries  Columbus  and  Copernicus.  To  the 
Normans  we  owe  our  modes  of  reckoning  and  to  the  Lombards  our  book-keep- 
ing. These,  be  it  observed,  were  the  same  two  Germanic  stocks  which  created 
the  two  most  suggestive  juristic  works  of  the  early  Gothic,^  and  whose  long- 
ing into  distant  seas  gave  the  impulses  for  the  two  discoveries  of  America. 
“ Double-entry  book-keeping  is  born  of  the  same  spirit  as  the  system  of  Galileo 
and  Newton.  . . . With  the  same  means  as  these,  it  orders  the  phenomenon 
into  an  elegant  system,  and  it  may  be  called  the  first  Cosmos  built  up  on  the 
basis  of  a mechanistic  thought.  Double-entry  book-keeping  discloses  to  us  the 
Cosmos  of  the  economic  world  by  the  same  method  as  later  the  Cosmos  of  the 
stellar  universe  was  unveiled  by  the  great  investigation  of  natural  philosophy. 

. . . Double-entry  book-keeping  rests  on  the  basic  principle,  logically  carried 
out,  of  comprehending  all  phenomena  purely  as  quantities.’*  ^ 

Double-entry  book-keeping  is  a pure  Analysis  of  the  space  of  values^  referred  to  a 
co-ordinate  system^  of  which  the  origin  is  the  ''  Firmd'  The  coinage  of  the  Classical 
world  had  only  permitted  of  arithmetical  compilations  with  yaluc-magnitudes. 
Here,  as  ever,  Pythagoras  and  Descartes  stand  opposed.  It  is  legitimate  for  us 
to  talk  of  the  “ integration”  of  an  undertaking,  and  the  graphic  curve  is  the 
same  optical  auxiliary  to  economics  as  it  is  to  science.  The  Classical  economy- 
world  was  ordered,  like  the  cosmos  of  Democritus,  according  to  stuff  and  form. 
A stuff,  in  the  form  of  a coin,  carries  the  economic  movement  and  presses 
against  the  demand-unit  of  equal  value-quantity  at  the  place  of  use.  Our 
economy-world  is  ordered  hj  force  and  mass.  A field  of  money-tensions  lies  in 
space  and  assigns  to  every  object,  irrespective  of  its  specific  kind,  a positive  or 
negative  effect-value,^  which  is  represented  by  a book-entry.  ''Quod  non  est  in 
libriSi  non  est  in  mundo.  * * But  the  symbol  of  the  functional  money  thus  imagined, 
that  which  alone  maybe  compared  with  the  Classical  coin,  is  not  the  actual 
book-entry,  nor  yet  the  share-voucher,  cheque,  or  note,  but  the  act  by  which  the 
function  is  fulfilled  in  writing,  and  the  r61e  of  the  value-paper  is  merely  to  be  the 
generalized  historical  evidence  oi  this  2.ct. 

Yet  side  by  side  with  this  the  West,  in  its  unquestioning  admiration  of  the 
Classical,  has  gone  on  striking  coins,  not  merely  as  tokens  of  sovereignty,  but 
in  the  belief  that  this  evidenced  money  was  money  corresponding  in  reality  to 

^ P-  75-  . . , , 

Sovsxhztt^  Der  moderni.Kapitalismus^Tiy’p.  11^. 

^ There  is  a close  relation  between  our  picture  of  the  nature  of  electricity  and  the  process  of  the 
“clearing-house,"  in  which  the  positive  and  negative  money-positions  of  several  firms  (centres  of 
tension)  arc  equated  amongst  themselves  by  a purely  mental  act  and  the  true  position  made  present- 
able by  a booking.  Cf.  Vol.  I,  Ch.  XL 


MONEY  431 

the  economics  in  thought.  In  just  the  same  way,  even  within  the  Gothic  age, 
we  took  over  Roman  law  with  its  equating  of  things  to  bodily  magnitudes,  and 
the  Euclidean  mathematic,  which  was  built  upon  the  concept  of  number  as 
magnitude.  And  so  it  befell  that  the  evolution  of  these  three  intellectual  form- 
worlds  of  ours  proceeded,  not  like  the  Faustian  music  in  a pure  and  flowerlike 
unfolding,  but  in  the  shape  of  a -progressive  emancipation  from  the  notion  of  magnitude. 
The  mathematic  had  already  achieved  this  by  the  close  of  the  Baroque  age.^  The 
jurisprudence,  on  the  other  hand,  has  not  yet  even  recognized  its  coming  task,^ 
but  this  century  is  going  to  set  it,  and  to  demand  that  which  for  Roman  jurists 
was  the  self-evident  basis  of  law,  namely,  the  inward  congruence  of  economic 
and  legal  thought  and  an  equal  practical  familiarity  with  both.  The  conception 
of  money  that  was  symbolized  in  the  coin  agreed  precisely  with  the  Classical 
thing-law,  but  with  us  there  is  nothing  remotely  like  such  an  agreement.  Our 
whole  life  is  disposed  dynamically,  not  statically  and  Stoically;  therefore  our 
essentials  are  forces  and  performances,  relations  and  capacities  — organizing 
talents  and  intuitive  intellects,  credit,  ideas,  methods,  energy-sources  — and 
not  mere  existence  of  corporeal  things.  The  “ Romanist’  ’ thing-thought  of  our 
jurists,  and  the  theory  of  money  that  consciously  or  unconsciously  starts  from 
the  coin,  are  equally  alien  to  our  life.  The  vast  metallic  hoard  to  which,  in 
imitation  of  the  Classical,  we  were  continually  adding  till  the  World  War  came, 
has  indeed  made  a r61e  for  itself  off  the  main  road,  but  with  the  inner  form,  tasks, 
and  aims  of  modern  economy  it  has  nothing  to  do;  and  if  as  the  result  of  the 
war  it  were  to  disappear  from  currency  altogether,  nothing  would  be  altered 
thereby.® 

Unhappily,  the  modern  national  economics  were  founded  in  the  age  of  Clas- 
sicism. Just  as  statues  and  vases  and  stiff  dramas  alone  counted  as  true  art,  so 
also  finely  stamped  coins  alone  counted  as  true  money.  What  Josiah  Wedgwood 
(1758)  aimed  at  with  his  delicately  toned  reliefs  and  cups,  that  also,  at  bottom, 
Adam  Smith  aimed  at  in  his  theory  of  value  — namely,  the  pure  present  of 
tangible  magnitudes.  For  it  is  entirely  consonant  with  the  illusion  that  money 

t Vol.  I,  Ch.  n. 

; ® P.  81. 

® In  oof  Culture  the  credit  of  a country  rests  upon  its  economic  capacity  and  the  political  organ- 
ization thereof  — which  imparts  to  the  operations  and  bookings  of  finance  the  character  of  real 
money-creations  — and  not  on  any  quantity  of  gold  that  may  be  put  into  this  or  that.  It  is  the 
Classicist  superstition  that  raises  the  gold  reserve  to  the  status  of  an  actual  measure  of  credit  — actual 
in  that  the  level  of  credit  is  thereby  made  dependent,  not  upon  “ will,”  but  upon  ” can.”  But  the 
current  coins  are  wares ^ which,  relatively  to  national  credit,  possess  a grke  — the  poorer  the  credit,  the 
higher  the  price  of  gold  — so  that  thenceforth  it  can  only  be  upheld  against  that  of  other  wares.  Thus 
gold  is  measured  like  other  wares  against  the  unit  of  book-reckoning,  and  not  vice  versa  as  the  term 
‘*gold  standard”  suggests.  It  serves  also  as  means  of  payment  in  minor  transactions,  as  for  that 
matter  a postage-stamp  does.  In  old  Egypt  (whose  money-thought  is  astoundingly  like  the  Western) 
there  was  nothing  resembling  the  coin  even  under  the  New  Empire.  The  written  transfer  was  en- 
tirely sufficient,  and  the  Classical  coins  that  filtered  in  from  650  to  the  founding  of  Alexandria  and  the 
Hellenistic  regime  were  usually  cut  to  pieces  and  reckoned  by  weight  as  a ware. 


491  the  decline  OF  THE  , WEST 

and  pieces  of  money  are  the  same,  to  measure  the  value  of  a thing  against  the 
magnitude  of  a quantity  of  work.  Here  work  is  no  longer  an  effecting  in  a world 
of  effects,  a working  which  can  differ  infinitely  from  case  to  case  as  to  inward 
worth  and  intensity  and  range,  which  propagates  itself  in  wider  and  wider  circles 
and  like  an  electric  field  may  be  measured  but  not  marked  off — but  the  result 
of  the  effecting,  considered  entirely  materially,  that  which  is  worked-up,  sl  tangible 
thing  showing  nothing  noteworthy  about  it  except  just  its  extent. 

In  reality,  the  economy  of  the  European- American  Civilmation  is  built  up 
on  work  of  a kind  in  which  distinctions  go  entirely  according  to  the  inner 
quality  - — more  so  than  ever  in  China  or  Egypt,  let  alone  the  Classical  World. 
It  is  not  for  nothing  that  we  live  in  a world  of  economic  dynamism,  where  the 
works  of  the  individual  are  not  additive  in  the  Euclidean  way,  but  functionally 
related  to  one  another.  The  purely  executive  work  (which  alone  Marx  takes 
into  account)  is  in  reality  nothing  but  the  function  of  an  inventive,  ordering, 
and  organising  work;  it  is  from  this  that  the  other  derives  its  meaning,  relative 
value,  and  even  possibility  of  being  done  at  all.  The  whole  world-economy 
since  the  discovery  of  the  steam-engine  has  been  the  creation  of  a quite  small 
number  of  superior  heads,  without  whose  high-grade  work  everything  else 
would  never  have  come  into  being.  But  this  achievement  is  of  creative  thinking, 
not  a quantum,^  and  its  value  is  not  to  be  weighed  against  a certain  number 
of  coins.  Rather  it  is  itself  money  — Faustian  money,  namely,  which  is  not 
minted,  but  thought  of  as  an  efficient  centre  coming  up  out  of  a life  — and  it  is  the 
inward  quality  of  that  life  which  elevates  the  thought  to  the  significance  of  a 
fact.  Thinking  in  money  generates  money  — that  is  the  secret  of  the  world-economy. 
When  an  organizing  magnate  writes  down  a million  on  paper,  that  million 
exists,  for  the  personality  as  an  economic  centre  vouches  for  a corresponding 
heightening  of  the  economic  energy  of  his  field.  This,  and  nothing  else,  is  the 
meaning  of  the  word  “ Credit  ’ * for  us.  But  all  the  gold  pieces  in  the  world  would 
not  suffice  to  invest  the  actions  of  the  manual  worker  with  a meaning,  and 
therefore  a value,  if  the  famous  “expropriation  of  the  expropriators”  were  to 
eliminate  the  superior  capacities  from  their  creations,*  were  this  to  happen, 
these  would  become  soulless,  will-less,  empty  shells.  Thus,  in  fact,  Marx  is 
just  as  much  a Classical,  just  as  truly  a product  of  the  Romanist  law-thought 
as  Adam  Smith;  he  sees  only  the  completed  magnitude,  not  the  function,  and 
he  would  like  to  separate  the  means  of  production  from  those  whose  minds,  by 
the  discovery  of  methods,  the  organization  of  efficient  industries,  and  the 
acquisition  of  outlet-markets,  alone  turn  a mass  of  bricks  and  steel  into  a factory, 
which,  if  their  forces  find  no  field  of  play,  do  not  occur. ^ 

1 That  IS  why  it  docs  not  exist  for  our  (present)  jurisprudence. 

2 All  this  equally  holds  good  for  the  case  of  “workers*’  taking  over  the  leadership  of  the  works. 
Either  they  are  incapable  of  management,  and  the  business  collapses,  or  they  are  capable  of  something, 
and  then  they  themselves  become  inwardly  entrepreneurs  and  think  thenceforward  only  of  main- 
taining their  power.  No  theory  can  eliminate  this  fact  from  the  world,  for  so  life  is. 


money  ^ . 

If  anyone  seeks  to  enunciate  a theory  of  modern  work,  let  him  begin  by 
thinking  of  this  basic  trait  of  ail  life.  There  are  subjects  and  objects  in  every 
kind  of  life  as  lived,  and  the  more  important,  the  more  rich  in  form,  the  life  is, 
the  clearer  the  distinction  between  them.  As  every  stream  of  Being  consists  of 
a minority  of  leaders  and  a huge  majority  of  led,  so  everji  sort  of  economy  consists 
in  leader-work  and  executive  work.  The  frog’s  perspective  of  Marx  and  the  social- 
ethical  ideologues  shows  only  the  aggregate  of  last  small  things,  but  these  only 
exist  at  all  in  virtue  of  the  first  things,  and  the  spirit  of  this  world  of  work 
can  be  grasped  only  through  a grasp  of  its  highest  possibilities.  The  inventor 
of  the  steam-engine  and  not  its  stoker  is  the  determinant.  The  thought  is  what 
matters. 

And,  similarly,  thinking  in  money  has  subjects  and  objects:  those  who 
by  force  of  their  personality  generate  and  guide  money,  and  those  who 
are  maintained  by  money.  Money  of  the  Faustian  brand  is  the  force  dis- 
tilled from  economy-dynamics  of  the  Faustian  brand,  and  it  appertains  to  the 
destiny  of  the  individual  (on  the  economic  side  of  his  life-destiny)  that  he  is 
inwardly  constituted  to  represent  a part  of  this  force,  or  that  he  is,  on  the 
contrary,  nothing  but  mass  to  it. 

V 

The  word  ‘‘  Capital ’ * signifies  the  centre  of  this  thought  — not  the  aggregate 
of  values,  but  that  which  keeps  them  in  movement  as  such.  Capitalism  comes  into 
existence  only  with  the  world-city  existence  of  a Civilization,  and  it  is  confined 
to  the  very  small  ring  of  those  who  represent  this  existence  by  their  persons  and 
intelligence;  its  opposite  is  the  provincial  economy.  It  was  the  unconditional 
supremacy  achieved  by  the  coin  in  Classical  life  (including  the  political  side 
of  that  life)  that  generated  the  static  capital,  the  hipop\ii\  or  starting-point,  that 
by  its  existence  drew  to  itself,  in  a sort  of  magnetic  attraction,  things  and  again 
things  en  masse.  It  was  the  supremacy  of  book-values,  whose  abstract  system 
was  quickly  detached  from  personality  by  double-entry  book-keeping  and 
worked  forward  by  virtue  of  its  own  inward  dynamism,  that  produced  the 
modern  capital  that  spans  the  whole  earth  with  its  field  of  force. ^ 

Under  the  influence  of  its  own  sort  of  capital  the  economic  life  of  the  Clas- 
sical world  took  the  form  of  a gold-stream  that  flowed  from  the  provinces  to 
Rome  and  back,  and  was  ever  seeking  new  areas  whose  stock  of  worked-up 
gold  had  not  yet  been  “opened  up.”  Brutus  and  Cassius  carried  the  gold  of 

^ Thus  it  is  only  since  1770  that  the  banks  have  become  centres  of  an  economic  power  which 
made  its  first  intervention  with  politics  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna.  Till  then  the  banker  had  in  the 
main  concerned  himself  with  bill  business.  Tlic  Chinese,  and  even  the  Egyptian,  banks  had  a differ- 
ent significance,  and  the  Classical  banks,  even  in  the  Rome  of  Caesar’s  day,  may  best  be  described  as 
cash-tills.  They  collected  the  yield  of  taxes'  in  cash,  and  lent  cash  against  replacement;  thus  the 
temples,  with  their  stock  of  precious  metal  in  the  form  of  votive  offerings,  became  “banks.”  The 
temple  of  Delos,  through  several  centuries,  lent  at  ten  per  cent. 


494  : . THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST- 

Asia  Minor  on  long  mnlc-trains  to  the  battle-field  of  Philippi  — one  can  imagine 
what  sort  of  an  economic  operation  the  plunder  of  a camp  after  a battle  must 
have  been  — and  even  C.  Gracchus,  almost  a century  earlier,  alluded  to  the 
amphorae  that  went  out  -from  Rome  to  the  provinces  full  of  wine  and  came  back 
full  of  gold.  This  hunt  for  the  gold  possessions  of  alien  peoples  corresponds 
exactly  to  the  present-day  hunt -for  coal,  which  in  its  deeper  meaning  is  not  a 
thing, vbut  a store  of  energy. 

■ But,  equally,  , the  Classical  craving  for  the  near  and  present  could-  not  but 
match  the  Polis-ideal  with  an  economic  ideal  of  Autarkeia^  an  economic  atomiza- 
tion corresponding  to  the  political.  Each  of  these  tiny  life-units  desired  to  have 
an  economic  stream  wholly  of  its  own,  wholly  self-contained,  circling  inde- 
pendently of  all  others  zni  within  the  radius  of  visihility  . The  polar  opposite  of 
this  is  the  Western  notion  of  the  Firmy  which  is  thought  of  as  an  entirely  im- 
personal and  incorporeal  centre  of  force,  from  which  activity  streams  out  in  all 
directions  to  an  indefinite  distance,  and  which  the  proprietor  by  his  ability  to 
think  in  money  does  not  represent^  but  possesses  and  directs  — thzt  is,  has  in  his 
power  — like  a little  cosmos.  The  duality  of  firm  and  proprietor  would  have 
been  utterly  unimaginable  for  the  Classical  mind. ^ 

Consequently,  as  the  Western  Culture  presents  a maximum,  so  the  Classical 
shows  a minimum,  of  organisation.  For  this  was  completely  absent  even  as  an 
idea  from  Classical  man.  His  finance  was  one  of  provisional  expedients  made 
rule  and  habit.  The  wealthy  burgher  of  Athens  and  Rome  could  be  burdened 
with  the  equipment  of  war-ships.  The  political  power  of  the  Roman  asdile 
(and  his  debts)  rested  on  the  fact  that  he  not  only  produced  the  games  and  the 
streets  and  the  buildings,  but  paid  for  them  too  — of  course,  he  could  recoup 
himself  later  by  plundering  his  province.  Sources  of  income  were  thought  of 
only  when  the  need  of  income  presented  itself,  and  then  drawn  upon,  without 
any  regard  for  the  future,  as  the  moment  required  — even  at  the  cost  of  entirely 
destroying  them.  Plunder  of  the  treasures  of  one’s  own  temples,  sea-piracy 
against  one’s  own  city,  confiscation  of  the  wealth  of  one’s  own  fellow-citizens 
were  everyday  methods  of  finance.  If  surpluses  were  available,  they  were 
distributed  to  the  citizens  — a proceeding  to  which  plenty  of  people  besides 
Eubulus  of  Athens  owed  their  popularity,^  Budgets  were  as  unknown  as  any 
other  part  of  financial  policy.  The  “economic  management”  of  Roman  prov- 
inces was  a system  of  robbery,  public  and  private,  practised  by  senators  and 
financiers  without  the  slightest  consideration  as  to  whether  the  exported  values 
could  be  replaced.  Never  did  Classical  man  think  of  systematically  intensifying 
his  economic  life,  but  ever  looked  to  the  result  of  the  moment,  the  tangible 
quantum  of  cash.  Imperial  Rome  would  have  gone  down  in  ruin  had  it  not 

^ The  idea  of  the  Firm  took  shape  even  in  Late  Gothic  times  as  '"ratio"*  [hence  the  modern 
French  phrase  ‘ * raison  sociak  ’ ’ Tr.]  or  * * negoHatio.  ’ * It  is  impossible  to  render  it  exactly  in  a Classical 
language.  Negotium  meant  for  the  Romans  a concrete  process,  a “deal ” and  not  a “business,** 

2 Pohlmann,  Grkch.  Geschichte  (1914),  p.  ct  scq. 


been  fortunate  enough  to  possess  in  old  Egypt  a Civilmtion  that  had  for  a 
thousand  years  thought  oi  nothing  but  the  organi2ation  of  its  economy.  The 
Roman  neither  comprehended  nor  was  capable  of  copying  this  style  of  life,  ^ 

I but  the  accident  that  Egypt  provided  the  political  possessor  of  this  fellah-world 

with  an  inexhaustible  source  of  gold  rendered  it  unnecessary  for  him  to  make  a 
settled  hahit  of  proscription  at  home;  the  last  of  these  financial  operations  in 
massacre-form  was  that  of  43,  shortly  before  the  incorporation  of  Egypt.^  The 
amassed  gold  of  Asia  Minor  that  Brutus  and  Cassius  were  then  bringing  up, 
which  meant  an  army  and  the  dominion  of  the  world,  made  it  necessary  to  put 
to  the  ban  some  two  thousand  of  the  richest  inhabitants  of  Italy,  whose  heads 
were  brought  to  the  Forum  in  sacks  for  the  ofFered  rewards.  It  was  no  longer 
possible  to  spare  even  relatives,  children,  and  grey-heads,  or  people  who  had 
never  concerned  themselves  with  politics.  It  was  enough  that  they  possessed 
a stock  of  cash  and  that  the  yield  would  otherwise  have  been  too  small. 

But  with  the  extinction  of  the  Classical  world-feeling  in  the  early  Imperial 
age,  this  mode  of  thinking  in  money  disappeared  also.  Coins  again  became  wares 
■—because  men  were  again  living  the  peasant  life^  — and  this  explains  the 

^ Gcrcke-Norden,  Einl.  in  der  Altmumswissensch.^  Ill,  p. 

^ Kromayer,  in  Hartmann’s  R&n.  Gtsch.^  p.  150. 

2 The  “Jews  ” of  those  times  were  the  Romans  (p.  318),  and  the  Jews  themselves  were  peasant? 

I and  artizans  and  small  traders  (Parvan,  Du  NafionalitdtderKaufleute  in rom.  Kaiserreich,  1 909;  also  Momm^’ 

; sen,  Rom.  Gesch.,  V,  p.  471);  that  is,  they  followed  the  very  callings  that  in  the  Gothic  period  became 

;i  the  object  oi  their  merchant  activity.  Present-day  “Europe ” is  in  exactly  the  same  position  vis-d-vis 

I the  Russians  whose  profoundly  mystical  inner  life  feels  ‘ ‘ thinking  in  money  as  a sin,  (The  Pilgrim  in 

Gorki’s  Nigbt-asykm,  and  Tolstoi’s  thought  generally;  pp.  194, 178.)  Here  to-day  as  in  the  Syria  of 
Jesus’s  time  we  have  two  economic  worlds  juxtaposed  (pp.  191,  ct  seq.);  an  upper,  alien,  and  civilized 
world  intruded  from  the  West  (the  Bolshevism  of  the  first  years,  totally  Western  and  un-Russian,  is 
the  lees  of  this  infiltration),  and  a townless  barter-life  that  goes  on  deep  below,  uncalculating  and 
exchanging  only  for  immediate  needs.  We  have  to  think  of  the  catchwords  of  the  surface  as  a voice,  in 
which  the  Russian,  simple  and  busied  wholly  with  his  soul,  hears  resignedly  the  will  of  God. 
Marxism  amongst  Russians  is  based  on  an  inward  misunderstanding.  They  bore  with  the  higher 
economic  life  of  Petrinism,  but  they  neither  created  it  nor  recognized  it.  The  Russian  docs  not  fight 
Capital,  but  he  does  not  comprehend  it.  Anyone  who  understands  Dostoyevski  will  sense  in  these 
people  a young  humanity  /<?r  which  as  yet  no  money  exists^  but  only  goods  in  relation  to  a life  whose 
centre  of  gravity  does  not  lie  on  the  economical  side.  The  horror  of  values  supervening  from  nowhere 
! which  before  the  war  drove  many  to  suicide  is  a misconstrued  literary  disguise  of  the  fact  that,  for  a 

townlcss  barter-thinking,  money-getting  by  means  of  money  is  an  impiety,  and  (from  the  view-point 
of  the  coming  Russian  religion)  a sin.  To-day,  with  the  towns  of  Tsarism  in  ruin  and  the  mankind 
in  them  living  the  village  life  under  the  crust  (temporarily)  of  urban-thinking  Bolshevism,  he  has 
freed  himself  from  the  Western  economy.  His  apocalyptic  hatred  — the  same  that^  the  simple  Jew 
of  Jesus’s  day  bore  to  the  Roman  — is  directed  against  Petersburg,  as  a city  and  the  seat  of  a political 
power  of  Western  stamp,  but  also  as  the  centre  of  a thinking  in  Western  money  that  has  poisoned  and 
misdirected  the  whole  life.  The  Russian  of  the  deeps  to-day  is  bringing  into  being  a third  kind  of 
Christianity,  still  pricstless,  and  built  m the  John  Gospel  — a Christianity  that  stands  much  nearer  to 
the  Magian  than  to  the  Faustian  and,  consequently,  rests  upon  a new  symbolism  of  baptism,  and  looks 
neither  at  Rome  nor  at  Wittenberg,  but  past  Byzantium  towards  Jerusalem,  with  premonitions  of 
coming  crusades.  This  is  the  only  thing  that  this  new  Russia  really  cares  about.  And  it  will  no  doubt 
let  itself  fall  once  again  under  the  economy  of  the  West,  as  the  primitive  Christian  submitted  to  the 
Romans  and  the  Gothic  Christian  to  the  Jews.  But  inwardly  it  has  no  part  nor  lot  therein.  (Cf.  pp. 
191,  Z2.6,  zjSy  Z93,  195.) 


496  ■ THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

immense  outflow  of  gold  into  the  farther  East  after  Hadrian’s  reign,  which  has 
hithero  been  unaccountable.  And  as  economic  life  in  forms  of  gold-streams  was 
extinguished  in  the  upheaval  of  a young  Culture,  so  also  the  slave  ceased  to  be 
money,  and  the  ebb  of  the  gold  was  paralleled  by  that  mass-emancipation  of 
the  slaves  which  numerous  Imperial  laws,  from  Augustus’s  reign  onwards, 
tried  in  vain  to  check  — till  under  Diocletian,  in  whose  famous  maximum 
tariff  ^ money-economy  was  no  longer  the  standpoint,  the  type  of  the  Classical 
slave  had  ceased  to  exist. 

^ See  the  article  ‘ ‘ Diocletian,  Edict  of,”  Emy.  Brit.,  XI  ed.  — Tr. 


CHAPTER  XIV 


THE  FORM-WORLD  OF  ECONOMIC  LIFE 


(B) 

THE  MACHINE 


CHAPTER  XIV 


THE  FORM-WORLD  OF  ECONOMIC  LIFE 

(B). 

THE  MACHINE 

I 

Techniqhe  is  as  old  as  free-moving  life  itself.  Only  the  plant  — so  far  as  we 
can  see  into  Nature  — is  the  mere  theatre  of  technical  processes.  The  animal, 
in  that  it  moves,  has  a technique  of  movement  so  that  it  may  nourish  and  protect 
itself* 

The  original  relation  between  a waking-microcosm  and  its  macrocosm  — 
‘‘Nature’*  — consists  in  a touch  through  the  senses  V which  rises  from  mere 
scnsc-impressions  to  sense- judgment^  so  that  already  it  works  critically  (that  is, 
separatingly)  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  causal-analytically^  The  stock 
of  what  has  been  determined  then  is  enlarged  into  a system,  as  complete  as  may 
be,  of  the  most  primary  experiences  — identifying  marks^  — a spontaneous 
method  by  which  one  is  enabled  to  feel  at  home  in  one’s  world;  in  the  case  of 
many  animals  this  has  led  to  an  amazing  richness  of  experience  that  no  human 
science  has  transcended.  But  the  primary  waking-being  is  always  2x1  actm  one^ 
remote  from  mere  theory  of  all  sorts,  and  thus  it  is  in  the  minor  technique  of 
everyday  life,  and  upon  things  in  so  far  as  thy  are  deadf^  that  these  experiences 
are  involuntarily  acquired.  This  is  the  difference  between  Cult  and  Myth,®  for 
at  this  level  there  is  no  boundary  line  between  religion  and  the  profane  — all 
waking-consciousness  is  religion. 

The  decisive  turn  in  the  history  of  the  higher  life  occurs  when  the  deter- 
mination of  Nature  (in  order  to  be  guided  by  it)  changes  into  a fixation  — 
that  is,  a purposed  alteration  of  Nature.  With  this,  technique  becomes  more 
or  less  sovereign  and  the  instinctive  prime-experience  changes  into  a definitely 
“conscious”  ^time-knowing.  Thought  has  emancipated  itself  from  sensation. 
It  is  the  language  of  words  that  brings  about  this  epochal  change.  The  liberation 
of  speech  from  speaking  ® gives  rise  to  a stock  of  signs  for  communication-speech 
which  are  much  more  than  identification-marks  — they  are  names  bound  up  with 
a sense  of  meaning,  whereby  man  has  the  secret  of  numina  (deities,  nature- 
forces)  in  his  power,  and  nurriber  (formulas,  simple  laws),  whereby  the  inner 
form  of  the  actual  is  abstracted  form  the  accidental-sensuous.^ 

^ P.  6.  2 pp,  g seq,  3 p ^ P- ^5 

® P.  z68.  ^ P.  134.  ^ Pp.  15,  ct  seq.;  2.67,  ct  seq. 

■:  499' 


SC)0;^:;;,^  THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

With  thatj  the  system  of  identification-marks  deyelops  into  a theory,  a 
which  detaches  itself  from  the  technique  of  the  day  ^ — whether  this  be  a 
day  of  high-level  Civilized  technics  or  a day  of  simplest  beginnings  — by  way  of 
abstraction^  as  a piece  of  waking-consciousness  uncommitted  to  activity.  One 
"'  knows*’  what  one  wants,  but  much  must  have  happened  for  one  to  have  that 
knowledge,  and  we  must  make  no  mistake  as  to  its  character.  By  numerical 
experience  man  is  enabled  to  switch  the  secret  on  and  oif,  but  he  has  not  dis- 
covered it.  The  figure  of  the  modern  sorcerer  — ■ a switchboard  with  levers  and 
labels  at  which  the  workman  calls  mighty  effects  into  play  by  the  pressure  of  a 
finger  without  possessing  the  slightest  notion  of  their  essence  — is  only  the 
symbol  of  human  technique  in  general.  The  picture  of  the  light-world  around 
us  — in  so  far  as  we  have  developed  it  critically,  analytically,  as  theory,  as 
picture  — is  nothing  but  a switchboard  of  the  kind,  on  which  particular  things 
are  so  labelled  that  by  (so  to  say)  pressing  the  appropriate  button  particular 
effects  follow  with  certainty.  The  secret  itself  remains  none  the  less  oppressive 
on  that  account.^  But  through  this  technique  the  waking-consciousness  docs, 
all  the  same,  intervene  masterfully  in  the  fact-world.  Life  makes  use  of  thought 
as  an  ‘"open  sesame,”  and  at  the  peak  of  many  a Civilization,  in  its  great  cities, 
there  arrives  finally  the  moment  when  technical  critique  becomes  tired  of  being 
life’s  servant  and  makes  itself  tyrant.  The  Western  Culture  is  even  now  ex- 
periencing an  orgy  of  this  unbridled  thought,  and  on  a tragic  scale. 

Man  has  listened-in  to  the  match  of  Nature  and  made  notes  of  its  indices. 
He  begins  to  imitate  it  by  means  and  methods  that  utilize  the  laws  of  the  cosmic 
pulse.  He  is  emboldened  to  play  the  part  of  God,  and  it  is  easy  to  understand 
how  the  earliest  preparers  and  experts  of  these  artificial  things  — for  it  was 
here  that  art  came  to  be,  as  counter-concep  to  nature  — and  how  in  particular  the 
guardians  of  the  smith’s  art,  appeared  to  those  around  them  as  something 
uncanny  and  were  regarded  with  awe  or  horror  as  the  case  might  be.  The  stock 
of  such  discoveries  grew  and  grew.  Often  they  were  made  and  forgotten  and 
made  again,  were  imitated,  shunned,  improved.  But  in  the  end  they  constituted 
for  whole  continents  a store  of  self-evident  means  — - fire,  metal-working,  in- 
struments, arms,  ploughs,  boats,  houses,  animal-taming,  and  husbandry. 
Above  all,  the  metals,  to  whose  site  in  the  earth  primitive  man  is  led  by  some 
uncannily  mystical  trait  in  him.  Immemoriably  old  trade-routes  lead  to  ore- 
deposits  that  are  kept  secret,  through  the  life  of  the  settled  countryside  and 
over  frequented  seas,  and  along  these,  later,  travel  cults  and  ornaments  and 

^ And  not  vice  versa.  Cf.  p.  2.68. 

^ The  “correctness”  of  physical  data  (i.c.,  their  applicability  never  disproved  up  to  date,  and 
therefore  ranking  as  an  inter-pretapion)  is  wholly  independent  of  their  technical  value.  An  undoubtedly 
wrong,  and  even  self-contradictory,  theory  may  be  more  valuable  for  practical  purposes  than  a 
“correct”  and  profound  one,  and  physical  science  has  long  been  careful  to  avoid  applying  the  words 
“right”  and  “wrong”  in  the  popular  sense,  and  to  regard  their  syntheses  as  images  rather  than  flat 
formulsc. 


THE  MACHINE  501 

persistent  legends  of  islands  of  tin  and  lands  of  gold.  The  primary  trade  of  all 
is  the  metal  trade,  and  with  it  the  economics  of  production  and  of  work  are 
joined  intrusively  by  a third  •—  alien,  venturesome,  free-ranging  over  the  lands. 

On  this  foundation,  now,  arises  the  technique  of  the  higher  Cultures,  ex- 
pressive in  quality  and  colour  and  passion  of  the  whole  soul  of  these  major 
entities.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  Classical  man,  who  felt  himself  and  his 
environment  alike  Euclidean,  set  himself  ^ priori  in  hostile  opposition  to  the 
very  idea  of  technique.  If  by  “ Classicar*  technique  we  mean  something  that 
(along  with  the  rest  that  we  comprehend  in  the  adjective)  rose  with  determined 
effort  above  the  universal  dead  perfection  of  the  Mycenasan  age,  then  there  was 
no  Classical  technique.^  Its  triremes  were  glorified  row-boats,  its  catapults 
and  onagers  mere  substitutes  for  arms  and  fists  — not  to  be  named  in  the  same 
breath  with  the  war-engines  of  Assyria  and  China  —■  and  as  for  Hero  and  his 
like,  it  was  flukes  and  not  discoveries  that  they  achieved.  They  lacked  the 
inner  weight,  the  fatedness  of  their  moment,  the  deep  necessity.  Here  and  there 
men  played  with  data  (and  why  not?)  that  probably  came  from  the  East, 
but  no  one  devoted  serious  attention  to  them  and,  above  all,  no  one  made  a 
real  effort  to  introduce  them  into  the  ensemble-picture  of  life. 

Very  different  is  the  Faustian  technics,  which  with  all  its  passion  of  the 
third  dimension,  and  from  earliest  Gothic  days,  thrusts  itself  upon  Nature,  with 
the  firm  resolve  to  be  its  master.  Here,  and  only  here,  is  the  connexion  of  insight 
and  utilization  a matter  of  course.^  Theory  is  working  hypothesis  ® from  the 
outset.  The  Classical  investigator  “contemplated**  like  Aristotle’s  deity,  the 
Arabian  sought  as  alchemist  for  magical  means  (such  as  the  Philosophers’ 
Stone)  whereby  to  possess  himself  of  Nature’s  treasures  without  effort,^  but  the 
Western  strives  to  the  world  according  to  his  will. 

The  Faustian  inventor  and  discoverer  is  a unique  type.  The  primitive  force 
of  his  will,  the  brilliance  of  his  visions,  the  steely  energy  of  his  practical  pon- 
derings,  must  appear  queer  and  incomprehensible  to  anyone  at  the  standpoint  of 
another  Culture,  but  for  us  they  are  in  the  blood.  Gur  whole  Culture  has  a 
discoverer’s  soul.  To  dis-coYct  that  which  is  not  seen,  to  draw  it  into  the 
light-world  of  the  inner  eye  so  as  to  master  it  — that  was  its  stubborn  passion 
from  the  first  days  on.  All  its  great  inventions  slowly  ripened  in  the  deeps, 

1 What  Diels  has  managed  to  assemble  in  his  work  Antike  Technik  amounts  to  a comprehensive 
nullity.  If  we  take  away  from  it  what  belongs  to  the  older  Babylonian  Civilization  (such  as  water 
clocks  and  sun-dials)  and  to  the  younger  Arabian  Springtime  (such  as  chemistry  or  the  wonder-clock 
of  Gaza),  there  is  nothing  left  but  devices,  such  as  door-locks  of  a sort,  that  it  would  be  an  insult  to 
attribute  to  any  other  Culture. 

2 The  Chinese  Culture,  too,  made  almost  all  these  European  discoveries  on  its  own  account  — 
including  compass,  telescope,  printing,  gunpowder,  paper,  porcelain  — but  the  Chinese  did  not 
wrest,  but  wheedled,  things  out  of  Nature-  No  doubt  he  felt  the  advantages  of  his  knowledge  and 
turned  it  to  account,  but  he  did  not  hurl  himself  upon  it  to  exploit  it. 

^ It  is  the  same  spirit  that  distinguishes  the  Jewish,  Parsec,  Armenian,  Greek , and  Arab  ideas  of 
business  from  that  of  the  Western  peoples. 


\ : THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

to  emerge  at  last  with  the  necessity  of  a Destiny.  All  of  them  were  very  neatly 
approached  by  the  high-hearted,  happy  research  of  the  early  Gothic  monks. ^ 
Here,  if  anywhere,  the  religious  origins  of  all  technical  thought  are  manifested  A 
These  meditative  discoverers  in  their  cells,  who  with  prayers  and  fastings 
wrung  God’s  secret  out  of  him,  felt  that  they  were  serving  God  thereby.  Here  is 
the  Faust-figure,  the  grand  symbol  of  a true  discovering  Culture.  Thc  Scientia 
experimentalise  as  Roger  Bacon  was  the  first  to  call  nature-research,  the  insistent 
questioning  of  Nature  with  levers  and  screws,  began  that  of  which  the  issue 
lies  under  our  eyes  as  a countryside  sprouting  factory-chimneys  and  conveyor- 
towers.  But  for  all  of  them,  too,  there  was  the  truly  Faustian  danger  of  the 
Devil’s  having  a hand  in  the  game,®  the  risk  that  he  was  leading  them  in  spirit 
to  that  mountain  on  which  he  promises  all  the  power  of  the  earth.  This  is  the 
significance  of  the  perpetuum  mobile  of  by  those  strange  Dominicans 

like  Petrus  Peregrinus,  which  would  wrest  the  almightiness  from  God.  Again 
and  again  they  succumbed  to  this  ambition;  they  forced  this  secret  out  of 
God  in  order  themselves  to  be  God.  They  listened  for  the  laws  of  the  cosmic 
pulse  in  order  to  overpower  it.  And  so  they  created  the  idea  of  the  machine  a 
small  cosmos  obeying  the  will  of  man  alone.  But  with  that  they  overpassed 
the  slender  border-line  whereat  the  reverent  piety  of  others  saw  the  beginning 
of  sin,  and  on  it,  from  Roger  Bacon  to  Giordano  Bruno,  they  came  to  grief. 
Ever  and  ever  again,  true  belief  has  regarded  the  machine  as  of  the  Devil. 

The  passion  of  discovery  declares  itself  as  early  as  the  Gothic  architecture — 
compare  with  this  the  deliberate  form-poverty  of  the  Doric  ! — and  is  manifest 
throughout  our  music.  Book-printing  appeared,  and  the  long-range  weapon.^ 
On  the  heels  of  Columbus  and  Copernicus  come  the  telescope,  the  microscope, 
the  chemical  elements,  and  lastly  the  immense  technological  corpus  of  the 
early  Baroque. 

Then  followed,  however,  simultaneously  with  Rationalism,  the  discovery 
of  the  steam-engine,  which  upset  everything  and  transformed  economic  life 
from  the  foundations  up.  Till  then  nature  had  rendered  services,  but  now  she 
was  tied  to  the  yoke  as  a slave^  and  her  work  was  as  though  in  contempt  meas- 
ured by  a standard  of  horse-power.  We  advanced  from  the  muscle-force  of  the 

^ P.  301  Albcrtus  Magnus  lived  on  in  Icgctid  as  the  great  magician.  Roger  Bacon  meditated 
upon  steam-engines,  steamships,  and  aircraft.  (F.  Strunz,  Gesch,  d.  Naturwiss.  in  Msttdalnfe  1910, 

p.88.) 

2 P.  z68.  According  to  Roger  Bacon  the  “third  r61e  of  science,'*  which  is  not  relative  to  the 
other  sciences,  consists  in  the  power  that  makes  it  to  search  the  secrets  of  nature,  to  discover  past 
and  future,  and  to  produce  so  many  marvellous  results  that  power  is  assured  to  those  who  possess  it. 
. . . The  Church  should  take  it  into  consideration  in  order  to  spare  Christian  blood  in  the  struggle 
with  the  infidel  and  above  all  in  preparation  for  the  perils  that  will  menace  us  in  the  days  of  Anti- 
christ (E.  Gilson,  Fhiloso-phk  du  Mjaym  Age,  p,  xi8).  TV. 

® P.  x88.  » 

* Greek  fire  was  onIy"to  terrify  and  to  ignite,  but  here  the  tense  force  of  the  gases  of  explosion 
arc  converted  into  energy  of  motion.  Anyone  who  seriously  compares  the  two  does  not  understand 
the  spirit  of  the  Western  technique. 


THE  MACHINE  ^^3 

NegrOj  which  was  set  to  work  in  organized  routines,  to  the  organic  reserves  of 
the  Earth’s  crust,  where  the  life-forces  of  millennia  lay  stored  as  coal;  and 
to-day  we  cast  our  eyes  on  inorganic  nature,  where  water-forces  are  already 
being  brought  in  to  supplement  coal.  As  the  horse-powers  run  to  millions  and 
inilliards,  the  numbers  of  the  population  increase  and  increase,  on  a scale  that 
no  other  Culture  ever  thought  possible.  This  growth  is  a product  of  the  Machine, 
which  insists  on  being  used  and  directed,  and  to  that  end  centuples  the  forces  of 
each  individual.  For  the  sake  of  the  machine,  human  life  becomes  precious. 
Work  becomes  the  great  word  of  ethical  thinking;  in  the  eighteenth  century 
it  loses  its  derogatory  implication  in  all  languages.  The  machine  works  and 
forces  the  man  to  co-operate.  The  entire  Culture  reaches  a degree  of  activity 
such  that  the  earth  trembles  under  it. 

And  what  now  develops,  in  the  space  of  hardly  a century,  is  a drama  of 
such  greatness  that  the  men  of  a future  Culture,  with  other  soul  and  other 
passions,  will  hardly  be  able  to  resist  the  conviction  that  *‘in  those  days” 
nature  herself  was  tottering.  The  politics  stride  over  cities  and  peoples;  even 
the  economics,  deeply  as  they  bite  into  the  destinies  of  the  plant  and  animal 
worlds,  merely  touch  the  fringe  of  life  and  efface  themselves.  But  this  technique 
will  leave  traces  of  its  heyday  behind  it  when  all  else  is  lost  and  forgotten.  For 
this  Faustian  passion  has  altered  the  Face  of  the  Earth. 

This  is  the  outward-  and  upward-straining  life-feeling  ~ true  descendant, 
therefore,  of  the  Gothic  — as  expressed  in  Goethe’s  Faust  monologue  when  the 
steam-engine  was  yet  young.  The  intoxicated  soul  wills  to  fly  above  space  and 
Time.  An  ineffable  longing  tempts  him  to  indefinable  horizons.  Man  would 
free  himself  from  the  earth,  rise  into  the  infinite,  leave  the  bonds  of  the  body, 
and  circle  in  the  universe  of  space  amongst  the  stars.  That  which  the  glowing 
and  soaring  inwardness  of  St.  Bernard  sought  at  the  beginning,  that  which 
Griinewald  and  Rembrandt  conceived  in  their  backgrounds,  and  Beethoven  in 
the  trans-earthly  tones  of  his  last  quartets,  comes  back  now  in  the  intellectual 
intoxication  of  the  inventions  that  crowd  one  upon  another.  Hence  the 
fantastic  trafiic  that  crosses  the  continents  in  a few  days,  that  puts  itself  across 
oceans  in  floating  cities,  that  bores  through  mountains,  rushes  about  in  subter- 
ranean labyrinths,  uses  the  steam-engine  till  its  last  possibilities  have  been 
exhausted,  and  then  passes  on  to  the  gas-engine,  and  finally  raises  itself  above 
the  roads  and  railways  and  flies  in  the  air;  hence,  it  is  that  the  spoken  word  is 
sent  in  one  moment  over  all  the  oceans;  hence  comes  the  ambition  to  break  all 
records  and  beat  all  dimensions,  to  build  giant  halls  for  giant  machines,  vast 
ships  and  bridge-spans,  buildings  that  deliriously  scrape  the  clouds,  fabulous 
forces  pressed  together  to  a focus  to  obey  the  hand  of  a child,  stamping  and 
quivering  and  droning  works  of  sted  and  glass  in  which  tiny  man  moves  as 
unlimited  monarch  and,  at  the  last,  feels  nature  as  beneath  him. 

And  these  machines  become  in  their  forms  less  and  ever  less  human,  more 


504  ■ ■ / . THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

ascetic,  mystic,  esoteric.  They  weave  the  earth  over  with  an  infinite  web  of 
subtle  forces,  currents,  and  tensions.  Their  bodies  become  ever  more  and  more 
immaterial,  ever  less  noisy.  The  wheels,  rollers,  and  levers  are  vocal  no  more. 
All  that  matters  withdraws  itself  into  the  interior.  Man  has  felt  the  machine 
to  be  devilish,  and  rightly.  It  signifies  in  the  eyes  of  the  believer  the  depo- 
sition of  God.  It  delivers  sacred  Causality  over  to  man  and  by  him,  with  a sort 
of  foreseeing  omniscience  is  set  in  motion,  silent  and  irresistible. 

' ii 

Never  save  here  has  a microcosm  felt  itself  superior  to  its  macrocosm,  but 
here  the  little  life-units  have  by  the  sheer  force  of  their  intellect  made  the  un- 
living dependent  upon  themselves.  It  is  a triumph,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  un- 
paralleled. Only  this  our  Culture  has  achieved  it,  and  perhaps  only  for  a few 
centuries. 

But  for  that  very  reason  Faustian  man  has  become  the  slave  of  his  creation. 
His  number,  and  the  arrangement  of  life  as  he  lives  it,  have  been  driven  by  the 
machine  on  to  a path  where  there  is  no  standing  still  and  no  turning  back. 
The  peasant,  the  hand-worker,  even  the  merchant,  appear  suddenly  as  ines- 
sential in  comparison  with  the  three  great  figures  that  the  Machine  has  bred  and 
trained  up  in  the  cause  of  its  development:  the  entrepreneur^  the  engineer^  and  the  factory-^ 
worker.  Out  of  a quite  small  branch  of  manual  work  — namely,  the  preparation- 
economy — there  has  grown  up  (in  this  one  Culture  alone')  a mighty  tree  that 
casts  its  shadow  over  all  the  other  vocations  namely,  the  economy  of  the  machine- 
industry.^  It  forces  the  entrepreneur  not  less  than  the  workman  to  obedience. 
Both  become  slaves,  and  not  masters,  of  the  machine,  that  now  for  the  first 
time  develops  its  devilish  and  occult  power.  But  although  the  Socialistic 
theory  of  the  present  day  has  insisted  upon  looking  only  at  the  latter *s  contri- 
bution and  has  claimed  the  word  work”  for  him  alone,  it  has  all  become 
possible  only  through  the  sovereign  and  decisive  achievement  of  the  former. 
The  famous  phrase  concerning  the  strong  arm”  that  bids  every  wheel  cease 
from  running  is  a piece  of  wrong-headedness.  To  stop  them  — yes!  but  it  docs 
not  need  a worker  to  do  that.  To  keep  them  running  — no ! The  centre  of  this 

^ Marx  is  quite  right;  it  is  one  of  the  creations  (and  what  is  more,  the  proudest  creation)  of  the 
bourgeoisie.  But,  spellbound  as  he  is  by  the  ancicnt-mediseval-modern  scheme,  he  has  failed  to 
note  that  it  is  only  the  bourgeoisie  of  this  one  single  Culture  that  is  master  of  the  destiny  of  the 
Machine.  So  long  as  it  dominates  the  earth,  every  noo-Europcan  tries  and  will  try  to  fathom  the 
secret  of  this  terrible  weapon.  Nevertheless,  inwardly  he  abhors  it,  be  he  Indian  or  Japanese,  Russian 
or  Arab.  It  is  something  fundamental  in  the  essence  of  the  Magian  soul  that  leads  the  Jew,  as  en- 
trepreneur and  engineer,  to  stand  aside  from  the  creation  proper  of  machines  and  devote  himself  to 
the  business  side  of  their  production.  But  so  also  the  Russian  looks  with  fear  and  hatred  at  this 
tyranny  of  wheels,  cables,  and  rails,  and  if  he  adapts  himself  for  to-day  and  to-morrow  to  the  in- 
evitable, yet  there  will  come  a time  when  he  will  i/of  out  the  whole  thing  from  his  memory  and  his  en- 
vironment^ and  create  about  himself  a wholly  new  world,  in  which  nothing  of  this  Devil’s  technique 
is  left. 


THE  MACHINE  505 

artificial  and  complicated  realm  of  the  Machine  is  the  organizer  and  manager. 
The  mind,  not  the  hand,  holds  it  together.  But,  for  that  very  reason,  to  pre- 
serve the  ever  endangered  structure,  om  figure  is  even  more  important  than  all 
the  energy  of  enterprising  master-men  that  make  cities  to  grow  out  of  the  ground 
and  alter  the  picture  of  the  landscape;  it  is  a figure  that  is  apt  to  be  forgotten 
in  this  conflict  of  politics  — the  engineer ^ the  priest  of  the  machine,  the  man 
who  knows  it.  Not  merely  the  importance,  but  the  very  existence  of  the 
industry  depends  upon  the  existence  of  the  hundred  thousand  talented,  rigor- 
ously schooled  brains  that  command  the  technique  and  develop  it  onward 
and  onward.  The  quiet  engineer  it  is  who  is  the  machine’s  master  and  destiny. 
His  thought  is  as  possibility  what  the  machine  is  as  actuality.  There  have  been 
fears,  thoroughly  materialistic  fears,  of  the  exhaustion  of  the  coal-fields.  But 
so  long  as  there  are  worthy  technical  path-finders,  dangers  of  this  sort  have  no 
existence.  When,  and  only  when,  the  crop  of  recruits  for  this  army  fails  — 
this  army  whose  thought-work  forms  one  inward  unit  with  the  work  of  the 
machine  — the  industry  must  flicker  out  in  spite  of  all  that  managerial  energy 
and  the  workers  can  do.  Suppose  that,  in  future  generations,  the  most  gifted 
minds  were  to  find  their  soul’s  health  more  important  than  all  the  powers  of 
this  world;  suppose  that,  under  the  influence  of  the  metaphysic  and  mysticism 
that  is  taking  the  place  of  rationalism  to-day,  the  very  61ite  of  intellect  that  is 
now  concerned  with  the  machine  comes  to  be  overpowered  by  a growing  sense 
of  its  Satanism  (it  is  the  step  from  Roger  Bacon  to  Bernard  of  Clairvaux)  — 
then  nothing  can  hinder  the  end  of  this  grand  drama  that  has  been  a play  of 
intellects,  with  hands  as  mere  auxiliaries. 

The  Western  industry  has  diverted  the  ancient  traditions  of  the  other  Cul- 
tures. The  streams  of  economic  life  move  towards  the  seats  of  King  Coal  and 
the  great  regions  of  raw  material.  Nature  becomes  exhausted,  the  globe 
sacrificed  to  Faustian  thinking  in  energies.  The  working  earth  is  the  Faustian 
aspect  of  her,  the  aspect  contemplated  by  the  Faust  of  Part  II,  the  supreme 
transfiguration  of  enterprising  work  — and  contemplating,  he  dies.  Nothing 
is  so  utterly  antipodal  to  the  motionless  satiate  being  of  the  Classical  Empire. 
It  is  the  engineer  who  is  remotest  from  the  Classical  law-thought,  and  he  will 
see  to  it  that  his  economy  has  its  law,  wherein  forces  and  efficiencies  will 
take  the  place  of  Person  and  Thing. 

m 

But  titanic,  too,  is  the  onslaught  of  money  upon  this  intellectual  force* 
Industry,  too,  is  earth-bound  like  the  yeoman.  It  has  its  station,  and  its  ma- 
terials stream  up  out  of  the  earth.  Only  high  finance  is  wholly  free,  wholly 
intangible.  Since  1789  the  banks,  and  with  them  the  bourses,  have  developed 
themselves  on  the  credit-needs  of  an  industry  growing  ever  more  enormous,  as  a 
power  on  their  own  account,  and  they  will  (as money  wills  in  every  Civilization) 


5o6  -‘THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  WEST 

to  be  the  only  power.  The  ancient  wrestle  between  the  productive  and  the  ac- 
quisitive economies  intensifies  now  into  a silent  gigantomachy  of  intellects, 
fought  out  in  the  lists  of  the  world-cities.  This  battle  is  the  despairing  struggle 
of  technical  thought  to  maintain  its  liberty  against  money-thought.^ 

The  dictature  of  money  marches  on,  tending  to  its  material  peak,  in  the 
Faustian  Civilization  as  in  every  other.  And  now  something  happens  that  is 
intelligible  only  to  one  who  has  penetrated  to  the  essence  of  money i If  it  were 
anything  tangible,  then  its  existence  would  be  for  ever  — but,  as  it  is  a form  of 
thought,  it  fades  out  as  soon  as  it  has  thou^t  its  economic  world  to  finality^  and  has 
no  more  material  upon  which  to  feed.  It  thrust  into  the  life  of  the  yeoman’s 
countryside  and  set  the  earth  a-moving;  its  thought  transformed  every  sort  of 
handicraft;  to-day  it  presses  victoriously  upon  industry  to  make  the  productive 
work  of  entrepreneur  and  engineer  and  labourer  alike  its  spoil.  The  machine 
with  its  human  retinue,  the  real  queen  of  this  century,  is  in  danger  of  succumbing 
to  a stronger  power.  But  with  this,  money,  too,  is  at  the  end  of  its  success, 
and  the  last  conflict  is  at  hand  in  which  the  Civilization  receives  its  conclusive 
form  — the  conflict  money  and  blood. 

The  coming  of  Csesarism  breaks  the  dictature  of  money  and  its  political 
weapon  democracy.  After  a long  triumph  of  world-city  economy  and  its  interests 
over  political  creative  force,  the  political  side  of  life  manifests  itself  after  all  as 
the  stronger  of  the  two.  The  sword  is  victorious  over  the  money,  the  master- 
will  subdues  again  the  plunderer-will.  If  we  call  these  money-powers  “Capi- 
talism,” ^ then  we  may  designate  as  Socialism  the  will  to  call  into  life  a mighty 
politico-economic  order  that  transcends  all  class  interests,  a system  of  lofty 
thoughtfulness  and  duty-sense  that  keeps  the  whole  in  fine  condition  for  the 
decisive  battle  of  its  history,  and  this  battle  is  also  the  battle  of  money  and  law.^ 
The  private  powers  of  the  economy  want  free  paths  for  their  acquisition  of  great 
resources.  No  legislation  must  stand  in  their  way.  They  want  to  make  the 
laws  themselves,  in  their  interests,  and  to  that  end  they  make  use  of  the  tool 
they  have  made  for  themselves,  democracy,  the  subsidized  party.  Law  needs, 
in  order  to  resist  this  onslaught,  a high  tradition  and  an  ambition  of  strong 
families  that  finds  its  satisfaction  not  in  the  heaping-up  of  riches,  but  in  the 
tasks  of  true  rulership,  above  and  beyond  all  money-advantage.  A power  can  be 
overthrown  only  by  another  power,  not  by  a principle,  and  no  power  that  can  confront 

^ Compared  with  this  mighty  contest  between  the  two  handfuls  of  steel-hard  men  of  race  and  of 
immense  intellect  — which  the  simple  citizen  neither  observes  nor  comprehends  — the  battle  of 
mere  interests  between  the  employing  class  and  the  workers’  Socialism  sinks  into  insignificance 
when  regarded  from  the  distant  world-historical  view-point.  The  working-class  movement  is  what 
its  leaders  mah  of  it,  and  hatred  of  the  owner  has  long  enlisted  itself  in  the  service  of  the  bourse. 
Practical  communism  with  its  ‘'class-war”  — to-day  a long  obsolete  and  adulterated  phrase  — is 
nothing  but  the  trusty  henchman  of  big  Capital,  which  knows  perfectly  well  how  to  make  use  of  it. 

2 In  this  sense  the  interest-politics  of  the  workers’  movements  also  belong  to  it,  in  that  their 
object  is  not  to  overcome  the  money-values,  but  to  possess  them. 


THE  MACHINE 

money  is  Irft  but  this  one.  Money  is  overthrown  and  abolished  only  by  blood. 
Life  IS  alpha  and  omega,  the  cosmic  onflow  in  microcosmic  form.  It  is  tie  hct 
of  facts  within  the  world-as-history.  Before  the  irresistible  rhythm  of  the 
generation-sequence,  everything  built  up  by  the  waking-consciousness  in  its 
intellectual  world  vanishes  at  the  last.  Ever  in  History  it  is  life  and  life  only  — 
race-quahty,  the  triumph  of  the  will-to-power  ~ and  not  the  victory  of  truths 
discoveries,  or  money  that  signifies.  World-history  is  the  world  court  and  it  has 
ever  decided  in  favour  of  the  stronger,  fuller,  and  more  self-assured  life- 
dccrced  to  it,  namely,  the  right  to  exist,  regardless  of  whether  its  right  would 
hold  before  a tribunal  of  waking-consciousness.  Always  it  has  sacrificed  truth 
and  justice  to  might  and  race,  and  passed  doom  of  death  upon  men  and  peoples 
in  whom  truth  was  more  than  deeds';  and  justice  than  power.  And  so  the 
drama  of  a high  Culture  — that  wondrous  world  of  deities,  arts,  thoughts, 
battles,  cities  closes  with  the  return  of  the  pristine  facts  of  the  blood  eternal 
that  is  one  and  the  same  as  the  ever-circling  cosmic  flow.  The  bright  imagi- 
native Waking-Being  submerges  itself  into  the  silent  service  of  Being,  as  the 
Chinese  and  Roman  empires  tell  ns.  .Time  triumphs  over  Space,  and  it  is  Time 
• whose  inexorable  movement  embeds  the  ephemeral  incident  of  the  Culture,  on 
this  planet,  in  the  incident  of  Man  — a form  wherein  the  incident  life  flows  on 
for  a time,  while  behind  it  all  the  streaming  horizons  of  geological  and  stellar 
histories  pile  up  in  the  light-world  of  our  eyes. 

For  us,  however,  whom  a Destiny  has  placed  in  this  Culture  and  at  this 
moment  of  its  development  — the  moment  when  money  is  celebrating  its  last 
victories,  and  the  Caesarism  that  is  to  succeed  approaches  with  quiet,  firm  step 
— our  direction,  willed  and  obligatory  at  once,  is  set  for  us  within  narrotv 
limits,  and  on  any  other  terms  life  is  not  worth  the  living.  We  have  not  the 
freedom  to  reach  to  this  or  to  that,  but  the  freedom  to  do  the  necessary  or  to  do 
nothing.  And  a task  that  historic  necessity  has  set  will  be  accomplished  with 
the  individual  or  against  him. 

Dmunt  Fata  voUntem^  mkntem  trahunf. 


INDEX 

Prepared  by  David  M.  Matteson 


Abbassids,  court  life,  Syncretism,  313; 

Third  Estate  and  rule,  424 
Abraham,  Judah’s  silver  pieces,  137 
Absolutism,  Dynastic  idea;  Politics 
Abu  Bekr,  Puritanism,  304 
Abu  Hanifa,  as  jurist,  75 
Academy,  style,  345 
Achikar,  as  Arabian,  xo8 
Achmed,  and  Caliph,  4x6 
Acosta,  Uriel,  expulsion,  317 
Acragas,  democratic  triumph,  396 
Actium,  battle,  importance,  191;  andCxsarism, 
42"3 

Activity,  waking-being  and  willed,  133 
Actuality,  and  abstract  thought,  144 
Adiabcnc,  Jewish  state,  175,  198,  2.09 
Adrianoplc,  battle,  effect,  40 
Adventism,  as  type  of  second  religiousness, 

3ii«. 

.iEIius,  TriprHta,  66 
/Eschyius,  and  being,  171;  and  religion, 
Agamemnon,  as  feudal,  374 
Agathoclcs,  and  Mamertincs,  i6o«.;  Syracuse 
massacre,  406®. 

Agis  III,  revolution,  65 

Agriculture,  effect  on  man,  89;  farmhouse  as 
symbol,  90;  modern,  as  tcc^ic,  479«.,  485s. 
Ahusamazda,  as  deity,  vyjn.;  and  Spenta 
Mainyu  and  Vohn  Mano,  X44». 

Akhenaton,  religiousness,  313;  revolution,  353 
Akiba,  legends,  x5o. 

Aksakov,  Ivan,  on  Petersburg,  193 
A1  Albiaq,  castle,  198 
Alaric,  historyless,  43a 
Albegensians,  Manichseans,  x&on. 

Albert  of  Saxony,  as  scientist,  301 
Albertus  Magnus,  X9i;  philosophy,  lyxw.;  and 
Devil-cult,  and  technique,  502.«. 

Alcibiades,  and  army,  406 
Alcmxonidas,  and  Athenian  history,  336 
Alesia,  siege,  411 

Alexander  the  Great,  as  follower,  88«.;  political 
character  of  empire,  174W.7  divine  descent, 
314;  andpolis,  383;  control  by  generals,  407. 
See  also  Macedonians 

Alexandria,  as  world-city,  99;  outbreaks,  198W.; 
as  polis,  383 

Alfonso  X of  Castile,  work  on  planets,  316 


A1  Ghazali,  deification,  314;  and  science,  315 
AH,  war  with  Othman,  424;  power,  416 
Alien,  and  “proper”  in  sensation,  6 
“ All,”  as  word,  141 
A1  Maimun,  Rationalism,  3o6«. 

A1  Manzor,  Christian,  160 

Alp  Arslan,  power,  417 

Alphabet.  See  Writing 

Amasis,  rise,  4x8 

Amenemhet  I,  absolutism,  387 

Amenhotep  (Amenophis)  IV,  city,  loin.; 

religiousness,  313;  revolution,  353 
Amenophis  IV.  See  Amenhotep 
American  Revolution,  effect  in  France,  41 1«.; 
cause,  loyalists,  41 

Americans,  as  race,  Indian  influence,  119;  as 
people,  creation  of  events,  165;  language  and 
nation,  183;  and  predestination,  305;  Civil 
War,  356,  369«.,  4x1,  488«.;  fate  of  govern- 
ment, 416;  basis  of  reverence  for  constitution, 
430«-/  no  yeomanry,  449».;  party  and 
political  machine,  450-45X,*  economics  and 
politics,  475 

Ammonius  Saccas,  conversion,  176 
Amoraim,  period,  71,  X50;  and  commentary, 
247 

Amos,  as  Arabian  prophet,  X05 
Analysis,  and  double-entry  book-keeping,  490 
Anastasius  I,  demonstration  against,  38i«, 
Ancestral  worship,  Chinese,  time-mythology, 
x86,  351 

Ancient  History,  as  term,  x8 
Angelico,  Fra,  frescoes  and  the  Devil,  X9X«. 
Animal,  essential  character,  microcosm  in 
macrocosm,  3,  4, 15;  cosmic  beat  and  tension, 
4,  5;  cosmic  organs,  blood,  sex,  5;  microcos- 
mic  organ,  sense,  5,  6,  115;  sense  and  under- 
standing, 6;  sight  as  supreme  sense,  6;  being 
and  waking-being,  7;  and  language,  131-134; 
and  art,  i33w.>*  involuntary  technique,  499 
Anselm,  Saint,  Arabian  contemporaries,  X50 
Anti-Semitism,  rationale,  3 17-3x1 
Antioch,  as  un-Qassical,  ioi«.;  as  capital  city, 
191;  as  polis,  383 

Antiochus  Epiphanes,  persecution,  110 
Antony,  Mark,  Actium,  191,  4x3;  on  Cicero, 

433». 

Aphrahat,  epistles,  uyin. 


ii  INDEX 


Aphrodisias,  Pagan  conversion,  159 
Apocalyptic,  predecessors  of  Mohammed,  xo^; 
related  Arabian,  ao4--2.o7,  zo9;  Arabian  de- 
velopment, xo8,  245;  Jewish  law  and  the 
prophets,  Z09,"  end  of  Jewish,  zii;  and 
Arabian  awakening,  ziz;  Jesus’  teaching,  ziy; 
and  Resurrection,  zi8;  Paul’s  attitude,  zzi; 
as  vision  of  fable,  Z37;  basis  of  writing,  Z45. 
See  also  Religion 
Apocrypha,  elimination,  71,  Z48 
Apollinaris,  Monophysite,  Z57 
Apollonian  cult,  and  body,  Z83;  and  Tyrannis, 

; 386V- 

Apoilonius,  as  biographer,  Z5Z 
Apologists,  period,  71,  Z50 
Apostles,  fictitious  authorships,  jun.  See  also 
Gospels 

Appius  Claudius.  Claudius 
Arabian  Culture,  historic,  xj;  problems  of 
study,  38;  as  discovery,  4z;  relation  to  other 
Cultures,  midmost,  4Z,  87,  190,  Z35;  land- 
scape, 4z;  Islam,  Civilization  and  Crusades, 
43;  pre-cuitural  law,  75;  pre-cultural  tribal 
association,  175;  pseudomorphosis,  189,  191; 
ignorance  of  inner  form,  partial  study,  190, 
191;  feudalism,  i96~zoo,*  Scholasticism  and 
Mysticism,  zoo,  Z50;  scientific  beginnings, 
xQon.;  space-concept,  cavern,  Z33;  time-con- 
cept, ordained  period,  eras,  Z38-Z40,  Z49; 
future  of  nations,  3Z3;  cognate  family,  330; 
dynastic  idea,  33o«.,  378,  379;  style  of  priest- 
hood, 3Z5;  relation  of  primary  estates,  353; 
political  periods  from  feudalism  to  Cassarism, 
4Z3-4Z7;  political  theory,  453.  See  also 
Cultures;  Islam;  Jews;  Pseudomorphosis; 
Religion;  Roman  law 
Aragon,  control  by  nobility,  373 
Aramaic,  and  Christianity,  ZZ5;  as  Jewish 
church-language,  Z5Z 
Archxans,  as  name,  161,  164 
Archxology,  as  Western  trait,  79 
Archimedes,  futility,  17 
Architecture,  Mexican,  45;  foreign  effects  of 
Western,  46;  cultural  mixture,  87;  Minoan 
and  Mycenasan  houses,  88;  cosmic  and  micro- 
cosmic,  9z,  93;  and  dwelling-house,  izo; 
as  religious  and  ornament,  1Z3;  secular  build- 
ings and  style,  1Z3;  Romanesque  soul,  180; 
basilica  and  mosque,  Z30.  See  also  Art 
Archons,  urban,  374;  overthrow,  398 
Areopagus,  overthrow,  396 
Argos,  massacre,  405 
Aristides,  on  Roman  polis,  383 
Aristocracy  of  intellect,  as  term,  i66v.  See  also 
Nobility 

Aristonicus,  and  Blossins,  454 


Aristotle,  universe,  58;  and  polis,  on 

Calani,  175??.;  and  commentary,  Z473^.; 
“Theology,”  Z48;  and  Rationalism,  305; 
corpus,  346 

Arius,  and  substance  controversy,  Z56 
Armenia,  conversion  as  state,  177,  Z55;  devil- 
worshippers,  Z36W.;  nobility,  4x3;  sword- 
dynasty,  4x6,  4x8 

Army,  Byzantine  system,  199;  professional, 
rise  as  political  power,  406.  See  also  War 
Arnold  of  Brescia,  and  reform,  Z96 
Art,  late  Minoan  and  early  Mycenxan,  87-89; 
expression-language  and  communication-lan- 
guage, 1 16;  taboo  and  totem  sides,  in  research, 
1 1 8,  IZO,  izi;  in  animals,  and  under- 

standing, 133;  forms,  33 lack  of  Classical 
financial  value,  destruction,  487;  as  counter- 
concept  to  native,  500.  See  also  Architecture; 
Ornament 

Aryan.  Indogermanic 

Asceticism.  See  Monasticism 

Asclepiades,  work,  Z5Z 

Asclepiodotus,  as  Pagan  missionary,  Z59 

Asoka,  religiousness,  313;  as  Sndra,  333 

Asosi,  as  feudal,  375 

Assuan  documents,  Z09 

Assyrians,  as  rulers,  40 

Astrakan,  Judaic  conversion,  Z59 

Astrology,  and  Arabian  time-concept,  Z38; 

as  late  Classical  fad,  310 
Astronomy,  Chaldean,  zo6 
Asvagosha,  Mahay  ana  doctrine,  313 
Atargatis,  cult,  zoi 

Athanasius,  and  Western  dogma,  Z30;  and 
substance  controversy,  Z56;  and  reform,  Z96 
Athens,  and  Alcomxonidx,  336;  vis-a-vis^ 
Sparta,  368,  Tyrannis,  386;  overthrow  of 
oligarchy,  396,  397 
Athos,  monasteries  as  Buddhistic,  314 
Atreus,  tomb,  89 
Auaris,  as  capital,  4x8 

Augustine,  Saint,  and  Grace,  59,  Z41;  on  Classi- 
cal religion  as  true,  Z04;  Manichxan,  zzy; 
dualism,  Z34;  community  of  the  elect,  Z43; 
on  ruler,  379 

Augustus,  principate  and  monarchy,  50,  349; 
and  dyarchy,  43Z,  433 

Aulard,  F.  Alphonse,  on  French  Revolution, 
399^* 

Aurelian,  State  religion,  Z53 

Aureole,  significance,  378 

Aurignacian  Man,  conditions,  34 

Austria,  national  origin,  i8z;  annihilation,  183. 

See  also  Holy  Roman  Empire 
Autarkeia,  Rationalism,  307 
Authority,  and  authorship,  Z48», 


iii 


INDEX 


Authorship,  and  authority,  i4%n, 

Avicenna,  Spinoza  as  heir,  311 

Avidius  Cassius,  on  Marcus  Aurelius,  430 

Axum,  ignored  history,  190;  feudalism,  197; 

and  Himaryites,  197;  stelae,  X34«.;  State 
•.'■religion,  Z53;. 

Aztecs,  rule,  45;  and  jurisprudence,  66;  and 
woman,  318 

Baal  cults,  in  Syncretism,  xoi 
Baal  Shem,  Gnosis,  zz8;  as  Messiah,  311 
Babek,  outbreaks,  424,  415 
Babylon,  as  world-city,  99 
Babylonian  Culture,  beginning,  achievements, 
rulers,  39,  40;  and  early  Jewish  law,  75; 
and  Arabian  Culture,  and  Chaldean, 

io5«.,  astrology,  z38/2. 

Bacchiada:,  and  succession,  380 
Bach,  John  Sebastian,  Exekias  as  contemporary, 
i35»- 

Bacon,  Roger,  philosophy,  ijxn.;  and  the  Devil, 
Z90W.,  501;  as  scientist,  301;  and  technique, 

50Z,  502.«. 

Baghdad,  as  Islam,  95;  as  world-city,  99,  4x5; 
plan,  100 

Balkuwara  Palace,  ioo». 

Banausos,  notion,  331 
Bank-note,  status,  483 
Banking,  cultural  basis,  493W. 

Bantu  language,  141 

Baptism,  as  impersonal,  Z93;  Luther’s  concept, 
2-99 

Barcochebas,  rising,  319 
Bar  das,  power,  416 
Bardas  Phocas,  power,  4x6 
Bardesanes,  period  and  task,  150,  157;  and 
substance,  155, 156, Vx5  8 

Baroque,  as  microcosmic  and  urban,  9Z,  93; 
science  and  Gothic  religiousness,  Z7o;  con- 
temporary Jewish  period,  316;  political  as- 
pect, 391,  405;  fifty-year  periods,  39i». 
Barrack-state,  366«. 

Barter,  in  early  Culture,  97,  480,  481 
Bartolus,  as  jurist,  77 

Baruch  Apocalypse,  fictitious,  yaw.;  dualism, 
Z34,  248 

Basel,  Council  of,  and  feudalism,  374 
Basileios  I,  power,  p.6 
Basileios  11,  and  rule,  42.6  ; , 

Basileios,  chancellor,  power,  417  : . 

Basileus,  as  feudal,  374  ; 

Basilica,  and  mosque,  230 
Basilides,  and  substance,  256 
Basques,  race,  165 
Basra,  Aii’s  capture,  426 
Bavaria,  as  State,  182 


Baxter,  Jedediah  H.,  on  American  race,  119 
Bayle,  Pierre,  on  understanding,  i3«. 
Beast-deities,  Classical,  276;  Myccnasan  and 
Egyptian,  zy€n. 

Beat,  and  tension,  4;  and  being,  7;  cosmic, 
in  crowd,  18.  See  also  Being 
Beatification,  scientific,  346 
Become,  and  understanding,  14,  15.  See  also 
Microcosm 

Becoming,  and  understanding,  14,  15.  See  also 
Cosmic 

Behistun  Inscription,  166,  207 
Being,  as  cosmic,  and  waking-beingt  7,  ii,  13; 
peasant  as,  89;  and  race,  113;  upward  series 
of  utterances,  116;  and  totem,  117;  and 
religion,  265;  and  faith,  271;  and  moral 
negations,  272-274;  and  truths,  274;  and 
nobility,  335;  and  idea  of  property,  343; 
ultimate  triumph,  435,  507;  and  economics, 
Af/i.  See  also  Cosmic;  History;  Politics; 
Race;  Sex;  Time;  Waking-being;  War 
Bel  temple,  Palnyra,  inscriptions,  206 
Belhommc,  Jacques,  and  aristocrats,  402«. 
Belisarius,  as  feudal  lord,  35o;z. 

Bcloch,  Julius,  on  migrant  minority,  164 
Benedictines,  as  rural,  91 
Bernadotte,  Jean  B.  J.,  and  Desiree  Clary,  329; 
rise,  406 

Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  Arabian  contemporaries, 
250;  on  love  of  God,  266«.;  and  compassion, 
273;  and  Maty-cult,  288;  and  contrition,  298 
Bible,  fixation  of  canon,  71,  248;  fictitious 
authorship,  72«.;  law  of  early  books,  75; 
rise  of  fetishism,  299.  See  also  Christianity; 
New  Testament;  Old  Testament;  Sacred 
books 

Biography,  in  Western  Culture,  29;  and  con- 
trition, 294 

Biology,  and  primitive  history,  48;  and  post- 
Civilization  history,  48 

Bismarck,  Furst  von,  dynastic  government,  415; 
flaw  in  leadership,  444 

Blackstone,  Sir  William,  Commentaries  as 
Germanic,  78 

Blake,  William,  “tiger”  expression,  i28?z. 
Blood  system,  cosmic  organ,  5 
Blossius,  influence,  454 

Blumenbach,  Johann  F.,  race  classification,  125 
Boar’s-hcad  attack,  199 
Boas,  Franz,  on  American  race,  119 
Boccaccio,  Giovanni,  and  Classicism,  uysn. 
Bodin,  Jean,  and  law  of  nature,  78 
Body,  in  Roman  law,  67;  Classical  concept  and 
Western  law,  81,  82;  and  Classical  cults, 
283;  and  polis,  384;  and  Classical  money 
concept,  486 


INDEX 


iv 

Bohmc,  Jakob,  and  Western  reiigious  beginnings, 

■■  x’Ex  .. 

Boghaz  Kciii,  archives,  167 
Bogomils,  iconociasm,  304 
Boliandists,  and  orders  and  schools,  346 
Bolshevism,  Tolstoi’s  relation,  as  pscudo- 
morphosis,  195;  cultural  basis  of  fury,  3ii«. 
Bonaventura,  Saint,  and  Devil-cult,  191 
Boniface,  Saint,  as  missionary,  56 
Boniface  VIII,  pope,  and  Jacopone,  196;  Unam 
smctanij  376 

Book,  expulsion  by  newspaper,  461;  as  personal 
expression,  463 

Book-keeping,  double-entry  as  Western  symbol, 

490 

Booty,  and  power,  344,  345,  347,  37i>  372-,  474 
Borchardt,  Ludwig,  erroneous  chronology,  39«. 
Borkman,  John  G.,  on  resources,  486 
Bosch,  Hicronymous,  paintings  and  the  Devil, 

Bourbons,  and  world-history,  i8a,  336 
Bourse,  as  cultural  phenomenon,  484«. 

Boxer  Rebellion,  cultural  basis,  ^xin, 

Bracton,  Henry  dc,  as  jurist,  76 
Brahmanism,  Sankhara  and  Neo-Brahmanism, 
315 

Breed.  Stt  Race 

Brcntano,  Clemens,  “playing”  with  expression, 
137 

Breughel,  Pieter,  and  the  Devil, 

Brunhilde,  as  destiny,  319 

Bruno,  Giordano,  and  machine  and  Devil,  501 

Brutus,  M.  Junius,  as  ideologue,  433«. 

Buch,  Christian  L.  von,  theory,  31 
Buddhism,  and  Indian  philosophy,  49;  and 
landscape,  in  China,  57,  3iz,  315;  and  sport, 
103;  and  depopulation,  106;  Rationalism, 
305,  307;  expansion,  308;  Hinayana  and 
Mahayana,  3ix;  and  Syncretism,  313;  deifi- 
cation of  Buddha,  314;  and  Neo-Brahmanism, 
315;  and  political  theory,  453 
Bunyan,  John,  and  concepts,  303 
Burdach,  Konrad,  on  Renaissance  and  Gothic, 
x^vn. 

Burghers.  Democracy;  Town 
Buridan,  Jean,  as  scientist,  301 
Burkard  of  Worms,  and  Devil-cult,  290 
Burke,  Edmund,  on  rights,  403 
Burning  of  the  Books,  and  Ca:sarism,  433,  434, 
463«. 

Bylini,  hero-tales,  192 

Byzantine  Empire,  and  inter-Culturcs,  89;  cult 
and  nationality.  State  religion,  176,  178,  230, 
243,  253,  258;  capital  city  as  symbol,  191; 
and  feudalism,  army  system,  198;  literature 
and  Arabian  literature,  304;  and  Crusades, 


319;  nobility  and  priesthood,  353;  Sassanid 
pattern,  378».;  class-basis  of  political  associa- 
tions, 38i«.;  revolution  in,  425;  Caesarism 
in,  426,  Sti  also  Arabian  Culture,  Pscudo- 
morphosis;  Religion 

Cscsar,  C.  Julius,  ahistoric,  24;  monarchy  and 
principatc,  50;  divine  descent,  314;  dema- 
gogy, money  and  power,  402,  457».,  458, 
459;  Gallic  conquests,  408;  Triumvirate  and 
Cxsarism,  423;  and  forms,  431^.,  432; 
killing  by  ideologues,  433;  tact  of  command, 
444;  at  Lucca,  446 

Ca^sarism,  and  second  religiousness,  310,  }86n,j‘ 
and  emperor-cult,  313;  transit  to,  as  cultural 
destiny,  416,  429,  434;  era  of  great  fact-men, 
418;  defined,  formless  strife  for  personal 
power,  418,  431,  434;  character  of  war,  419-- 
422;  ruthless  peace,  422;  Classical  evolution, 

422,  423,  430;  in  Arabian  Culture,  sultanate, 

423,  426,"  in  Egypt,  427;  coming  Western, 
and  overthrow  of  money,  428,  506,  507; 
and  megalopolitanism  and  return  of  race,  431; 
as  end  of  great  politics,  432,  434;  completed 
Roman,  and  ideologues,  432-434;  and  passing 
of  Culture,  435;  and  private  politics,  451, 
464;  battle  with  democracy,  464.  See  also 
Politics 

Cscsarius  of  Hcistcrbach,  and  Devil-cult,  290 
Calani,  as  term  for  philosophers,  i75«. 

Calchas,  and  Classical  religious  beginnings,  282, 

350 

Caliphate,  deification,  68;  yields  to  sultanate, 
425,  426 

Calvin,  John,  and  Grace,  59;  as  Gothic,  296; 

and  world-politics,  299;  and  science,  300 
Camden,  battle,  4i2«. 

Canada,  public-land  survey,  loin. 

Cannae,  battle,  importance,  191,  338 
Canon,  fixation,  71,  248;  as  term,  245;  Arabian 
style,  346.  See  also 
Canon  law,  development,  77 
Capital,  Western,  as  movement  of  values,  493; 

Classical  sort,  494.  See  also  Money 
Capital  city,  domination,  95;  of  Byzantine 
Empire,  191;  and  primary  estates,  356;  and 
State-idea,  377;  cultural  basis,  381 
Capitulations,  origin,  i77«. 

Caracalla,  citizenship  edict,  and  emperor- 
worship,  68 

Care,  family  and  State  as  symbols,  361;  legal 
modes,  363;  financial  officialdom,  371 
Carey,  Henry  C.,  and  English  economics,  469 
Carmathians,  outbreak,  425 
Carolingian  Renaissance,  character,  87 
Carthage,  as  Babylonian,  108;  in  Classical 


INDEX 


Civilization,  3Z3;  Rome,  368;  econ- 

omy and  politics,  475.  See  also  Punic  Wars 
Caspian  Sea,  and  intcrcultural  relations,  41 
Cassius,  Spurius,  and  cult,  386 
Caste,  meaning,  331,  333 
Castle,  as  totem,  racial  expression,  izi;  and 
ornament,  relation  to  style,  1x3;  talk,  153 
Catchwords,  as  term,  401 
Cathedral,  as  taboo  and  ornament,  i2.a,  113; 
speech,  153 

Catholic,  Western  churches  as,  ii3«.,  119 
Gatilinarian  movement,  financing,  402. 

Cato,  M.  Porcius  (Censor),  and  Scipio,  41 1; 
ruthlessness,  412. 

Cato,  M.  Porcius  (Uticensis),  rise,  4fO<^n.;  courts 
and  politics,  459 

Catulus,  Q.  Lutatius,  demagogy,  459 
Caucus,  as  political  means,  45  2.W. 

Causality,  human  (microcosmic)  type,  16-19; 
and  sex,  3x7.  See  also  Destiny;  Intelligence; 
Nature;  Religion;  Space;  Town;  Waking- 
being 

Cavern,  Arabian  symbol,  and  Chaldean  religion, 
106,  X33, 2.38  ' 

Cecils,  and  English  history,  337 
Censorship,  past  and  present,  463 
Ceremonial,  as  expression-language,  134 
Chacmultan,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45 
Chalcedon,  Council  of,  substance  controversy, 
X57;  and  reform,  196 

Chaldeans,  as  rulers,  40;  tribal  association,  175; 
religion  and  nation,  176;  cult  in  Syncretism, 
xoi;  as  term,  xQ^n.;  prophetic  religion,  105, 
109«,7  and  Babylonia,  X05W.,  zo6«./  astron- 
omy, xo6;  astrology,  X38;  oracles  as  canon, 
X45;  disappearance,  x5x 
Chamberlain,  Joseph,  and  political  machine, 

453«. 

Champutun,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45 
Chandragupta,  Sudra,  333 
Chang-I,  Imperialism,  417, 419 
Ghang-Lu,  church,  314 

Charlemagne,  and  cultural  mixture,  87;  and 
Devil-cult,  X90 

Charles  I of  England,  and  absolutism,  388 
Charles  IV,  emperor,  policy,  376 
Charles  Martel,  as  destiny,  19X 
Charondas,  character  of  laws,  63,  64 
Chartres,  Arabian  contemporaries  of  school,  X50 
Charvaka  doctrine,  105 
Chaucer,  GeoiFrey,  and  ** virtue,’’  307«. 
Chcirocracy,  Classical,  397 
Cherusci,  importance  of  victory,  48 
Chian,  importance,  50;  power,  4x8 
Chicken  Itza,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45 
Chinese  Culture,  as  historic,  x8;  problems  of 


study,  38;  transition  to  Caesarism,  Contend- 
ing States,  38,  40,  339,  416-419,  454;  date 
of  beginning,  i^n.;  periods,  cultural  con- 
temporaries, 40-4X;  fate,  4x;  end  of  real 
history,  49;  and  Buddhism,  57,  3 ix,  315; 
basis  of  laws,  ^jn.;  depopulation,  106;  na- 
tions under,  i78«.;  Tsin,  185;  and  sacred 
books,  X44«.;  Manichasans  and  Nestorians, 
x6o;  beginning  of  religion,  x8i,  X85;  time 
mythology,  x86;  dualism,  tao,  xSy;  landscape 
as  prime  symbol,  xSy;  second  religiousness 
and  Syncretism,  31X;  emperor-cult,  313,  379; 
fellah  State  religion,  315;  ancient  priest- 
estate,  350;  ancestry- worship,  351;  tao  and 
priesthood,  35x;  relation  of  primary  estates, 
35x;  world-power  idea,  373;  feudalism  and 
interregnum,  375;  dynasty-idea,  379;  Fronde 
in,  386;  period  of  protectors,  387;  Cassarlsm 
and  ideologues,  434;  status  of  early  coins, 
48i«.;  bank  notes,  483;  money  concept,  486, 
489«./  and  technique,  ^oin.  See  also  Cultures 
Chinese  language,  voice-differentiations,  i4o».; 
written  and  spoken,  145, 15 1;  standard  script, 
151 

Chios,  and  slaves,  488 

Chivalry,  Arabian,  198;  and  compassion  as 
contemporary,  X73 
Chlysti,  doctrines,  X78 
Chmenotep,  inscriptions,  387 
Chosen  People,  as  common  Arabian  idea,  X07 
Chosroes  Nushirvan,  and  Mazdak,  x6i 
Ch6u  dynasty,  residence,  9X;  fall,  376;  money 
concept,  489«. 

Christ,  as  name,  xi9«. 

Christian  Science,  as  fad,  310 
Christianity,  Arabian  and  Western,  form  and 
soul,  59,  X35,  X37,  X58;  period  of  Apologists, 
71;  of  Fathers,  71;  effect  of  Justinian,  74; 
Corpus  Juris  Canonici,  77;  and  Arabian  na- 
tions, 177;  nationalism  and  persecutions, 
177;  Arabian,  and  chivalry,  198;  Jesus-cuit 
and  Syncretism,  xoi,  xio,  X5X;  and  Hellenism, 
xo3,  xo4;  Jesus’  life  and  biography  as  central 
point,  xix;  and  Arabian  apocalyptic  litera- 
ture, xix;  and  Turfan  manuscripts,  xi3«.; 
and  Mandacanism  of  John  the  Baptist,  X14; 
self-view  of  Jesus  as  prophet  and  Messiah, 
townlessness,  115;  Jesus  and  Pilate,  symbol- 
ism, X16,  473«./  Jesus  and  pure  metaphysics, 
X17;  effect  of  Resurrection,  Messiah,  xi8; 
Arabian  cult-nationality  and  world  salvation, 
X19,  xxo;  Paul  and  Church,  xxo,  ixi;  Paul 
and  urban  intellect,  westward  trend,  xxi; 
Old  Testament  and  canon,  xxi,  1x5,  xx6,  xi8, 
X45;  Mark  Gospel,  XX3;  cults,  Mary-cult, 
XX3;  Greek  and  Latin  as  languages,  114,  X4i».; 


vt  INDEX 


i5x;  jolm  Gospel,  Mysticism,  Logos  and 
Paraclete,  Marcionlsm  and  early  Catho- 
lic Church,  x%j;  Arabian  West  and  East 
division,  2a,8-i3o;  architectural  symbols  of 
division,  x3o;  Arabian  Logos  and  Jesus’ 
world-image,  136, 2.37;  era,  139;  and  Judaism, 
separation,  Z5 1,  316;  early  Eastern,  x^in,; 
Eastern  State  religions,  Z5  3;  monasticism  in 
Arabian,  Z54;  Arabian  expansion,  and  inner 
contradiction,  ^55;  substance  controversy 
and  split,  Z55~Z58;  Greek,  157;  obligation 
to  other  missionarism,  159,  z6o;  end  of  Ara- 
bian theology,  z6i;  pre-period  of  Western,  Z77; 
Western  Mary-cult  and  Devil-cult,  z88-i9z; 
Western  guilt  and  free-will,  sacraments,  191, 
193;  Western  contrition,  ^93-195;  elements 
and  effect  of  Reformation,  z96-3oo;  present 
Russian,  495 ?z.  i'<?<f^/r^Manichasism;  Monoph- 
ysites;  Nestorianism;  Puritanism;  Religion; 
Roman  Catholic 

Chronology,  Arabian  spirit,  zy;  cultural,  39«.; 

Mexican,  44;  Arabian  eras,  Z39 
Chrysostom,  John,  and  conflict  of  estates,  353«. 
Chthonian  cults,  Z83,  z86 
Chufucianism,  fellah  character,  315 
Church,  and  religion,  443«. 

Church  and  State,  Arabian  concept,  168,  174- 
178,  zio,  Z4Z,  Z43,  Z5 3,  315,  317;  Roman  law 
and  established  church,  ijjn,;  and  Arabian 
monasticism,  Z54;  lack  of  equilibrium,  336 
Church  of  England,  new  transubstantiation 
controversy,  309W. 

Cicero,  M.  Tullius,  rise,  409;?.;  on  elections, 
43z«.;  and  party,  weakling,  433;  and  Divus 
idea,  433;  and  killing  of  Cxsar,  433».7  and 
demagogy,  458;  and  Trebatius,  45 8«. 
Cimabue,  Giovanni,  as  Gothic,  Z91 
Cineas,  on  Roman  Senate,  409 
Circus  parties,  as  term,  38 iw. 

Citation,  deeper  meaning,  Z48 
Citizenship,  Caracalla’s  edict  on  Roman,  68; 
Roman,  and  polis,  383,  384;  Classical 

idea,  384 

City.  S^e  Megalopolitanism;  Town 
City-leagues,  Classical,  355 
City  planning,  soulless  chessboard  form,  100 
Civil  War,  American,  defeat  of  aristocracy,  356, 
369«.;  and  military  art,  4Z1;  as  victory  of 
coal-energy,  488«. 

Civilization,  as  term,  ^in.;  position  of  present, 
37;  of  Mexican  Culture,  45;  exhaustion  and 
historylcssness,  48--51;  and  microcosmic,  9Z; 
and  dictatorship  of  money,  98;  as  tension, 
loz;  rootless  forms,  world-extension,  107; 
inner  stages,  present  Western,  109;  and  style, 
109;  survivals,  109; « superficial  hiswy,  109, 


339;  and  utilitarian  script,  15Z,  155;  Jewish, 
in  contact  with  Gothic,  317-319;  Jews  in 
Western,  3zz;  economics  under,  477,  484, 
493;  final  struggle,  money  and  Cxsarism, 
506.  Cxsarism;  Cultures;  Fcllahism; 

Megalopolitanism;  Politics 
Clary,  Desiree,  as  destiny,  3Z9 
Classes,  and  history,  96;  economic,  477. 
also  Estates 

Classical  Culture,  as  ahistoric,  and  script,  Z4, 
2-7,  361  150,  15Z;  similarity  of  Mexican,  43; 
end  of  real  history,  50;  relation  of  Renais- 
sance, 58;  Greek  laws,  61;  and  capital  city, 
95;  Civilization  cities,  loi;  Civilization  and 
sterility,  105;  destruction  and  survivals  of 
Civilization,  109;  nations  under,  polis  basis, 
173;  geographically-limited  cults,  zoo;  and 
revelation,  z44«.;  fate  in,  Z67;  beast  char- 
acter of  deities,  Z76;  obscure  religious  be- 
ginnings, Z81-Z83;  Orphism,  Asceticism,  Z83; 
outline  of  early  religion,  Z83,  Z84;  Greek  and 
Roman  cults,  Z84;  later  city-religions,  z8 5; 
personality-concept,  Z93«.;  second  religious- 
ness and  Syncretism,  31Z;  agnate  family, 
330;  ancient  priest-estate,  350;  style  of  no- 
bility, 351;  style  of  priesthood,  35 z;  position 
of  primary  estates,  353;  significance  of 
colonization,  354;  city-leagues,  355;  capital 
and  financial  organization,  37Z,  383,  493- 
496;  and  world-power,  373?z.;  feudalism 
and  polis,  374;  first  Tyrannis,  375,  386; 
dynasty-idea  and  oligarchy,  380,  381;  carp 
dim-,  383;  and  war,  385;  inter-Tyrannis 
period,  394-398;  second  Tyrannis,  405-408; 
period  of  Cxsarism,  evolution,  418,  4zz,  413, 
430;  military  technique  of  Civilization,  4Z0; 
trader-master  period,  484;  money  as  magni- 
tude, 486,  495;  money  and  land  and  art 
value,  487;  slaves  as  money,  488,  496;  and 
technique,  501.  Su  also  Cultures;  Polls; 
Pseudomorphosis;  Rome 
Claudii,  and  Roman  history,  336;  social  com- 
position, 357 

Claudius  I,  importance,  50 
Claudius,  Appius,  and  sons  of  freedmen,  166?;.; 
and  peasantry,  408,  410;  and  consul-list, 
409«.;  and  Punic  War,  410;  reforms  and 
demagogy,458 

Clausewitz,  Karl  von,  inversion  of  phrase,  y^on.; 

as  military  writer,  4i9?2. 

Clearing-house,  electrical  analogy,  490??, 
Clement,  Saint,  period,  Z50 
Cleomenes  I,  and  helots,  396 
Cleomenes  III,  fall,  65;  and  Sphxrus,  454?^. 
Cleomenes,  Alexander's  administrator,  and 
speculation,  484 


INDEX 


Cleon,  as  mass-leader,  448«. 

Clergy.  See  Priesthood 
Climate,  and  man's  history,  39«. 

Clisthenes,  and  Homer,  386 
Clock,  as  Western  symbol,  300W. 

Clodius.  See  Claudius 
Ciuniacs,  as  rural,  91 
Ciuny,  and  reform,  196 
Coal,  and  slaves,  488«. 

Code  Civil,  position,  76 
Code  of  Manu,  on  Sudra,  331 
Coins,  and  "money,”  48i«.,  483;  as  Classical 
symbol,  486;  Western  attitude,  490 
Coke,  Sir  Edward,  and  Roman  law,  78, 
Collinet,  Paul,  on  Justinian’s  Digests,  jon, 
Colonate,  end,  357 

Colonization,  significance  of  Classical,  354,  3557 
cultural  basis,  381/2. 

Colonna,  and  Papacy,  354 
Colonus,  vassalage,  350 
Colosseum,  decay,  107/2. 

Colour,  symbolism  in  Western  religion,  2.89 
Comitia  Centuriata,  and  money,  410;  and 
Punic  War,  410;  supporters,  451 
Comitia  Tributa,  and  conquest,  410;  support- 
ers, 451 

Commentary  on  sacred  books,  authoritative 
chain,  147, 148 

Common  law,  development,  76,  78 
Community.  See  Consensus 
Comnena,  Anna,  on  crusaders,  89 
Compass,  Chinese  invention,  501/2. 

Compassion,  and  being,  173;  and  chivalry,  173 
Comradeship,  and  race,  12.6 
Conception,  as  sin,  171.  See  also  Sex 
Condos,  feudal  force,  350/2. 

Confession.  See  Contrition 
"Confession  of  Peter,”  2.10 
Confucianism,  and  "Persian”  religion,  ifioj  as 
end  of  Culture,  i86,-  Rationalism,  306,  307, 
309;  Syncretism,  315;  and  nobility,  357;  and 
Caesarism,  434 

Confucius,  deification,  314;  on  Hwang,  388 
Congress  of  Princes,  38,  304 
Conmbmm,  cult  basis,  69 
Conrad  11,  emperor,  feudal  law,  371 
Conscription,  as  phase  of  Civilization,  410;  as 
substitute  for  war,  418;  effect  of  World  War, 
419 

Consensus,  as  Arabian  principle,  59,  73,  no; 
Arabian  community  of  elect,  141;  and 
Arabian  monasticism,  2.53;  phases  of  Jewish, 
315-317,  32.0 

Constance,  Council  of,  and  feudalism,  374 
Constantine  the  Great,  and  Roman  law  as 
Christian,  69;  and  Byzantium,  89;  and  cult 


vii 

and  nationality,  178, 130,  143, 153;  as  prince 
and  prelate,  104, 158;  and  Nicsca,  2.57 
Constantine  VII,  and  Romanos,  42.6 
Constitutio  Antoniana,  68 
Constitutions,  incomplete  system  of  written, 
361;  written  and  living,  369;  doctrinaire 
government,  413-415;  foresight,  415/2.;  status 
of  American,  430/2.;  character  of  German 
(1919),  457/2.  See  also  Politics 
Consuls,  origin  of  term,  374/2.;  beginning,  38a; 
and  Senate,  409;  as  forged  ancestors,  409/2.; 
and  party,  451 

Contemplation,  cultural  basis,  14^ 
Contemporaneity,  intercultural,  39-41 
Contending  States,  period  in  China,  38,  40,  339, 
416-419, 454 

Contrition,  Western  sacrament  and  Arabian 
submission,  and  Grace,  140-2.42.;  as  supreme 
Western  religious  concept,  193,  195;  and 
happiness,  194;  effect  of  decline,  194,  198, 
199;  as  English  idea,  194/2.;  and  Luther’s 
faith-concept,  198 

Conversion,  and  Arabian  cult-nationality,  119 
Copan,  and  Mexican  Culture,  44 
Corcyra,  massacre,  405 
Cordus,  Cremutius,  history  burnt,  434 
Corinth,  royal  succession,  380;  destruction, 

489  . 

Ojrporation,  and  Arabian  juridical  person,  174B. 
Corpus  Christi,  and  thanksgiving,  193 
Corpus  Juris,  position  in  Arabian  Culture,  71, 
74;  and  Western  law,  76-78;  and  canon  law, 

77 

Corpus  Juris  Germanici,  development,  76-78 
Corruption,  political  so-called,  458 
Cortes,  beginning,  373 
Cortez,  Hernando,  force  in  conquest,  44/2. 

Cos,  style  of  school,  345 
Cosmic,  relation  of  plant  and  animal  to,  3,  4, 
15;  beat,  feel,  4,  5;  organs,  5;  being,  7; 
crowd  and  beat,  18;  and  history,  2.3,  2.4;  in 
architecture,  91;  and  sex,  32.7;  earth  and 
universe,  391/2.  See  also  Being;  Landscape; 
Microcosm;  Plant;  Race 
Cosmogony,  of  Genesis,  109/2. 

Cosmopolitanism,  and  intelligentsia,  184.  See 
also  Mcgalopolitanisra 
Costume,  as  expression-language,  134  ^ 

Councils,  spirit  of  Arabian  and  Western  Chris- 
tian, 59;  and  pope,  374 

Country,  cosmic,  89;  relation  to  town,  91,  94; 
as  Gothic,  93;  historylcss,  96.  See  also 
Peasantry 

Courts,  Roman,  and  politics,  459.  See  also 
Jurisprudence;  Roman  law 
Crassus  Dives,  M.  Licinius,  and  money,  401; 


INDEX 


viii 

Triumvirate  and  Cassarism,  4x3;  politics  and 
finance,  458,  459;  and  court,  459 
Credit-system,  Western  concept,  489.  See  also 
Money 

Crete,  Minoan  art  and  Mycenae,  87-89;  and 
ctlanology,  12.9*  and  Mycenaean  beast-deities, 
x-jGn. 

Criticism,  relation  to  science  and  history,  24 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  Puritan  manifestation,  3ox; 

power,  389;  dictatorship,  390 
Cross,  and  Tree  of  Knowledge,  i Sow- 
Croton,  Sybaris,  303 ; style  of  school,  345 
Crowd  and  mob,  cosmic  beat,  18;  and  Cultures, 
18;  ethic,  341;  fourth  estate,  358;  and 
leaders,  376;  rise  of  power,  399 
Crusades,  and  Arabian  Civilization,  43;  as 
rural,  97;  and  nationalism,  iSo;  Jewish 
parallel,  198 

Ctesiphon,  school,  zoo;  location,  zoow. 
Cujacius,  and  Roman  law,  77 
Cult,  and  dogma,  cultural  attitude,  zoo,  zoi; 
technique,  and  myth,  z68,  499.  See  also 
Religion 

Cultures,  as  beings,  cosmic  beat,  19,  35;  his- 
toric and  ahistoric,  Z4,  zy;  as  basis  of  history, 
z6,  Z7,  44,  46-51,*  primitive,  character,  33, 
34;  mutation,  33,  36;  primitiveandpre-Cul- 
ture,  35,  89;  comparative  study,  36-38;  des- 
tined course,  37;  future,  37;  problems  of 
study,  37-39;  and  landscape  study,  39W., 
46;  dating,  39W./  contemporary  periods,  39- 
4z;  inter-Cultures,  87-89;  and  “return  to 
nature,”  135;  and  writing,  150;  relation 
of  people,  169,  170;  and  nations,  170-173, 
36Z;  narrow  circle  of  understanding,  z8o; 
and  religious  creativeness,  308;  intercultural 
dissonance,  race  and  time  elements,  317-3Z3; 
passing,  435;  economic  underlay,  474;  dis- 
tinct economic  styles,  477;  money-symbols, 
486.  Ste  also  Arabian;  Art;  Babylonian; 
Chinese;  Civilization;  Classical;  Economics; 
Egyptian;  Fcllahism;  History;  Indian; 
Landscape;  Language;  Mexican;  Macro- 
cosm; Morphology;  Natural  science;  Poli- 
tics; Race;  Religion;  Russian;  Technique; 
Town;  Western 

Cumont,  Franz,  on  old  Persian  religion,  Z07 
Customs,  purpose,  475 w- 
Cuvier,  Baron  Georges,  theory,  31 
Cynics,  Pietism,  308;  and  Socrates,  309 
Cyprus,  massacre,  198,  3zi«. 

Cyrene,  massacre,  i98«. 

Damascenus,  John,  as  A1  Manzor,  z6o 
Damascius,  as  biographer,  Z5z;  anchorite,  Z54 
Damiani,  Petrus,  and  Mary-cult,  z88 


Danai,  as  name,  161,  164 
Daniel,  fictitious,  yzw. 

Dante  Alighieri,  and  Devil-cult,  Z9Z;  and  “vir- 
tue,” 307W. 

Darius  the  Great,  Behistun  Inscription,  166,  Z07 
Darwinism,  shallowness,  31;  palasontoiogical 
reputation,  mutation,  3Z;  and  race  determi- 
nation, 1Z4;  and  genealogy,  180 
Death,  man  and  fear,  15,  16;  relation  to  light, 
Z65;  as  punishment,  zyz;  and  Classical  cults, 
Z83;  htmger-death  and  hero-death,  471 
Decemvirs,  code,  65;  significance,  396 
Dediticii  peregrins,  as  class,  68 
Dehio,  Georg,  on  houses  and  architecture,  izi 
Deism,  as  technic,  306 

Delbriick,  Hans,  on  ancient  armies,  40W.,  199W./ 
on  migrant  minority,  164 
Delos,  slave  market,  489;  temples  as  banks, 
493«- 

Demeter  cult,  Homer’s  ignoring,  z8z;  and 
Pythagoreans,  z8z;  survival,  zSiw.y  and  sex, 
Z83;  power,  Z90W. 

Demeter-Dionysus-Kore  cult,  in  Rome,  386 
Democracy  (Third  Estate),  urban,  97;  relation 
to  other  estates,  334;  rise  as  contradiction, 
355-358;  Plebs,  357,  408-411;  rise  of  Classical, 
387;  Classical,  in  inter-Tyrannis  period,  394- 
398;  rise  as  independent  force,  398;  nega- 
tive unity,  399;  and  mob,  399;  nationalism, 
and  money,  4oo“4oz,  485,  506;  in  England, 
40Z;  class  dictatorship,  403,  404;  and  Parlia- 
mentarism, 416;  period  in  Arabian  Culture, 
424-416;  decay,  431;  and  party,  449;  end, 
463-465;  social  and  economic  form,  478;  and 
machine  industry,  504W.  See  also  Politics 
Democritus,  atomic  theory,  58 
Depth-experience,  Western,  “I”  as  light-centre, 
8;  and  nations,  179;  as  prime  symbol,  z88; 
and  gunpowder  and  printing,  460;  and  tech- 
nique, 501-504 

Descartes,  Rene,  and  doubt,  iz 
Destiny,  and  cosmic  beat,  4;  and  facts,  iz; 
human  (cosmic)  type,  16-19;  and  natural 
science,  31;  in  nations,  170;  faith,  cultural 
basis  of  fate,  z66;  and  sex,  317,  319;  nobility 
15,  335,336,340;  States  as,  363;  in  war,  419, 
434.  i'w  also  Being;  Causality;  History; 
Race;  Time;  Will 

Deutero-Isaiah,  Persian  influence,  Z08 
Devil-cult,  development  of  Western,  188-191; 
Renaissance  and,  191;  and  contrition,  193; 
and  Protestantism,  199;  Puritanism,  301;  and 
machine,  501,  504«.,  505.  Witchcraft 

Diadochi,  and  Arabian  Culture,  1:90;  struggle, 
408 

Diakrii,  and  Tyrannis,  386 


INDEX 


Dictatorship,  of  class,  money  and  Rationalism 
403-405.  See  also  Politics 
Diels,  Hermann,  on  Classical  technique,  5oi». 
Dike,  age,  376,  378,  381 
Dikhans,  aristocracy,  353 
Diocletian,  distorted  importance,  38;  and  ortho- 
doxy, 178;  and  Nicodemia,  191;  army,  199; 
era,  ^39;  Church  and  State,  143,  2.53;  Syn- 
cretism, 2.5z;  feudalism,  349,  42.3;  fiscal 
machinery,  372.,  496;  and  economics,  480;?. 
Diodorus,  on  Roman  tenements,  Io^ 

Dionysiac  cult,  Homer’s  ignoring,  zSi;  survival, 
xSxn.;  power,  x^on.;  and  Tyrannis,  386 
Dionysius  I,  executions,  405;  and  army,  406; 
and  conquered  territory,  407;  war  technique, 
4x0 

Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  fictitious,  yxn. 
Diplomacy,  contrapuntal  politics,  381;  basis, 
440;  and  war,  440 
Direction,  historical,  361 
Discovery,  and  Western  history-picture,  i8,  46, 
501 

Dispensation,  and  valuation,  2.67 
Dispersion,  Jewish,  as  misnomer,  xio 
Disraeli,  Benjamin,  Jew  and  Englishman,  310 
Divorce,  English  reform,  64^2.7  civil  and  eccle- 
siastical conflict,  365«. 

Dodington,  George  B.,  on  party  loyalty,  4o3«. 
Dogma,  and  cult,  cultural  attitude,  loo-iox 
Dominicans,  as  urban,  92.;  and  Mary-cuit,  z88; 

and  Inquisition,  x^i 
Donellus,  Hugo,  and  Roman  law,  77 
Doomesday-Book,  37i»-,  37^ 

Dorians,  no  nation,  173 

Doric,  as  cosmic,  92.;  name  and  migration,  161, 
i6x 

Dostoyevski,  Feodor  M.,  on  Petersburg,  193; 
and  Russian  soul,  194-196;  and  Socialism, 
ii8;  religion,  X95?^.;  and  money,  495 
Dacon,  laws,  64,  65;  class  law,  365 
Drama,  as  urban,  93;  origin  of  Chinese,  x86 
Dreams,  and  cognition,  14 
Druses,  and  Trinity,  2.37 

Dualism,  in  Arabian  Culture,  2:33-2.36,  244; 
and  substance  controversy,  x^6;  Chinese, 
X87;  in  moral,  341 
Dukas,  power,  4x7 
Dukhobors,  as  manifestation,  xyS 
Duns  Scotus,  Joannes,  will  and  reason,  241; 

and  Devil-cult,  191 
Dyarchy,  Augustinian,  43X,  433 
Dynamics.  See  Force;  Motion;  Technique 
Dynastic  idea,  Western,  179-183,  378,  381;  and 
overthrow  of  monarchy,  language  struggles, 
183;  Arabian,  330W.,  378,  379,  4x3,  4x4; 
basis,  336;  relation  to  priesthood,  337;  and 


officialdom,  371;  elements,  377,  378;  Chinese 
and  Egyptian,  379;  Classical,  and  oligarchy, 
380,  381;  union  with  and  against  non-estate, 
386,  387;  European  absolutism,  388;  states- 
men as  leaders,  389;  in  Thirty  Years’  War, 
389;  in  Fronde  struggles,  outcome,  390;  re- 
public as  anti-dynastic,  413.  See  also  Politics 

Eastern  Empire.  See  Byzantine  Empire 

Ebionities,  origin,  xxon.;  disappearance,  X5X 

Eckart,  Meister,  on  Mysticism,  192;  and  Devil- 
cult,  303 

Economics,  and  writing,  152,  155;  classes  and 
political  estates,  333,  348,  477;  relation  to 
politics,  power  and  booty,  344,  345,  347,  474- 
476;  and  learning,  347;  and  estates,  356,  357; 
and  class-history,  367^.7  material  basis  of 
English  concept,  469;  not  self-contained, 
469;  English  premisses  of  usual  concept,  469, 
479;  real,  as  physiognomic,  470;  and  politics 
as  sides  of  being,  470,  471;  “in  form”  as 
self-regarding,  471;  hunger-death,  471;  re- 
lation to  family,  471;  significance  of  history, 
form-language,  472;  customary  ethic,  472; 
and  religion,  473;  waking-being  in,  473; 
producing  and  acquisitive,  474;  under  city 
life,  476;  morphology,  476-480;  production, 
preparation,  and  distribution,  478;  subjects 
and  objects  in  classes,  479,  493;  no  worker- 
class,  479«.;  spring  time  of  Culture,  traffic 
in  ‘ ‘goods,  ’ ’ and  ‘ ‘ possession,  ’ ’ 480;  status 
of  dealer  then,  481;  early  small-scale  traffic, 
48i«.;  town  life  and  trade,  ‘ ‘ wares  ’ ’ and 
money  measure,  481-484;  fortune  displaces 
possession,  483;  as  urban,  under  Civilization, 
484.  See  also  Money;  Technique;  Waking- 
being 

Ecstasy,  Arabian,  242,  244,  245 

Eddas,  and  nature  and  history,  xZ6n. 

Edcssa,  location,  xoon.;  and  substance  contro- 
versy, 256 

Edinburgh,  as  intellectual  centre,  305«. 

Education,  universal,  as  instrument  of  press,  462 

Egyptian  Culture,  as  historic,  28;  problems  of 
study,  38;  Hyksos  Period,  38,  41,  428«., 
453;  date  of  beginning,  39^.7  basis  of  law, 
67^.;  Minoan  art,  88;  Civilization  and  de- 
population, 106;  and  sea-folk,  109,  122,  164; 
alphabetical  script,  152;  nations  under,  i78«; 
beast-deities,  xj&n.;  religion  and  way  symbol, 
279,  281;  Re  religion  as  Reformation,  296; 
Syncretism,  313;  early  nobility,  350;  and 
genealogy,  351;  relation  of  primary  estates, 
353;  Pharaoh  as  Horus,  373;  feudalism  and 
interregnum,  375;  dynastic-idea,  379,  380; 
Fronde  in,  386;  Middle  Kingdom,  absolutism, 


X 


INDEX 


387;  period  of  Cxsarism,  4x7,  435;  money 
concept,  486,  483«.,  49i«.;  financial  organi- 
zation, 495 . See  also  Cultures 
Elections,  as  civil  war,  415;  decay,  electorate 
as  objects,  43x,  456,  463;  as  political  means, 
suffrage  and  technique,  447;  size  and  influence 
of  electorate,  455.  See  also  Democracy 
Electors,  rise  in  Empire,  373;  and  Thirty  Years’ 
War,  388,  391 

Electricity,  clearing-house  analogy,  49o», 
Elephantine  documents,  109 
Eleusinian  mysteries,  103 
Elkazites,  origin,  ij-on.;  disappearance, 

Elxai,  sacred  book,  zzon. 

Empedocles,  suicide,  ^83 
Emperor-mythology,  Chinese,  x86,  379 
Emperor-worship,  and  law  of  creed-communi- 
ties, 68;  Western  and  Eastern  aspects,  X03; 
and  Syncretism,  Z53;  Chinese,  313;  Cicero 
and,  433 

Empire,  as  Germanic  idea,  181.  See  also  Im- 
perialism 

Engineer,  as  master  of  Western  technique,  504, 

505 

England,  development  of  law,  62.,  75,  76,  78; 
and  dynastic  idea,  183;  and  Western  religious 
concepts,  X94«.;  politics  and  predestination, 
304;  property  law,  371;  Normans  and  finance, 
371;  Magna  Charta  and  control  by  nobility, 
rise  of  Parliament,  373;  Puritan  Revolution, 
389,  390;  eighteenth-century  class  absolutism, 
39X-394;  Parliamentarism  and  democracy, 
reform,  4ox“4o4,  41X,  4ix«.,  414;  politics. 
Rationalism  and  money,  403,  441;  and  French 
Revolution,  41 1,  411;  cessation  of  yeomanry, 
449«.;  political  flair,  451;  and  concept  of 
economics,  469, 479 
Enoch,  fictitious,  jui, 

Ephesus,  Council  of,  and  Christian  split,  X57; 

and  reform,  X96 
Ephors,  and  succession,  380 
Epic,  as  rural,  93;  Russian  hero-talcs,  191; 

Arabian  period,  X50.  See  also  litttiXMct 
Epicurus,  cult,  314 
Epimenides,  as  dogmatist,  x8x 
Epistemology,  Knowledge 
Epoch,  as  term,  33 
Equality,  and  party,  449 

Equites,  big-money  party,  401;  creation,  411; 

decay,  43x;  and  popuius,  451 
Equity,  and  statute  law,  363 
Eras,  as  Arabian  idea,  X39 
Erckert,  Roderick  von,  on  Jewish  type,  175 
Erigena,  John  Scotus,  world-concept,  zpjt, 
Essenes,  tendency,  xii 

Estates,  beginning,  x8o;  as  term,  3X9«.;  ‘'in 


form”  and  cultural  history,  330-331;  and 
residue  classes,  caste,  332.-334;  and  occupation 
classes,  333,  348,  477;  relation  to  non-estate, 
334;  and  society,  343;  build  and  course  of  Cul- 
tures, 347;  primary,  and  economy  and  science, 
347;  relation  to  peasantry,  vassalage,  348, 
349;  end  of  primary,  357;  primary  and  exist- 
ence of  State,  361;  and  laws,  364;  contest 
with  State,  366;  final  effort  for  rule,  385, 
386;  and  parties,  449.  See  also  Democracy; 
Nobility;  Politics;  Priesthood 
Ethics,  and  truth,  144;  Jesus  and  morals,  117; 
meaning  of  religious,  171, 171;  moral  defined, 
negations  and  being,  171-174;  character  of 
social,  173;  duality  of  moral,  noble  and 
priestly,  341;  custom-ethic,  crowd,  honour, 
341,  343;  in  economic  life,  348,  471;  dual 
moral  and  law,  363.  See  also  Philosophy; 
Religion;  Truth 

Etruscan  language,  and  Roman  cults,  i54«.; 
as  Roman,  395 «. 

Etruscans,  as  name,  and  people,  164;  no  nation, 
173 

Eubulus  of  Athens,  and  finance,  371,  494 

Eudaimonia,  Rationalism,  307 

Eugene  IV,  pope,  insurgent  faction,  ^Zin. 

Euhcmcrism,  306 

Evolution.  See  Darwinism 

E’we  language,  140 

Exchequer,  origin  of  term,  371 

Exegesis.  See  Sacred  books 

Exekias,  vase-painting,  135 

Exilarch,  position,  108 

Expansion,  political  aspect  of  Classical  con- 
quests, 407.  See  also  Imperialism 
Experience,  egoistic  basis,  16 
Expositio,  of  German  law,  76 
Expression,  defined,  133 

Ezekiel,  Persian  influence,  108;  and  Talmud, 
108;  revelation,  145 
Ezra,  and  Talmud,  108 

Fabii,  and  Roman  history,  336 
Factions,  political,  448 

Fantory-worker,  as  agent  of  Western  technique, 

■ 504  ■■ 

Facts,  and  truths,  ii,  11;  as  starting  point  of 
history,  47;  and  politics,  368 
Faith,  defined,  and  intellect,  166, 169, 171;  and 
life,  171;  Luther’s  concept  and  contrition, 
198;  under  Rationalism,  308,  309.  See  also 
Religion;  Truth 

Falasha,  as  Jews,  I76«./  as  tribe,  348,  479 
Family,  and  State,  319,  336;  cultural  basis,  330; 
relation  of  priesthood,  337;  cultural  styles  of 
nobility,  350,  351;  “in  form”  relation,  361; 


INDEX 


inward  experience,  365;  and  economic  side 
of  being,  471.  Sse  also  Sex 
Fan-Sui,  character,  419 
Fas,  md  jus,  yZy  j8 

Fate,  cultural  attitude,  z6j.  See  also  Destiny; 
Religion 

Faustian  Culture.  See  Western  Culture 
Fear,  human,  relation  to  invisible,  8,  ix;  of 
death,  15,  16;  and  “thou,”  133;  and  speech, 
133,  139;  and  Arabian  apocalypse,  xix;  and 
religion,  ^65 

Feeling,  and  understanding,  136;  language  and 
domination  of  intellect,  144,  145 
Fehbeliin,  battle,  importance,  i8z 
Fcllahism,  as  post-Civilization  residue,  105;  as 
term,  169;  of  Arabian  nations,  178;  and  paci- 
fism, 185,  186;  religious,  314;  rigidity,  36x 
Ferdinand  V of  Spain,  dynasty-idea,  381 
Feudalism,  cultural  contemporaries,  39,  40; 
Arabian,  196-199,*  Byzantine,  199;  vassalage, 
349;  union  of  power  and  booty,  fiscal  ma- 
chinery, 371,  371;  rise,  idea,  371,  376; 
Western  national  stirrings,  37^;  rise  of  con- 
trol by  Western  nobility,  371,  374;  world- 
power  idea,  Empire-Papacy  contest,  373,  374; 
Classical,  and  polis,  374;  decay,  interregnum, 
375  ; economy,  477 

Ficinus,  Marsilius,  and  Devil-cult,  191 
Fictitious  authorship,  significance  in  Arabian 
Culture,  jtn. 

Fifty-year  period,  cultural  rhythm,  39i«. 
Finance,  rise  of  officialdom,  371;  Classical  atti- 
tude, 383.  See  also  Money 
Finck,  F.  N.,  on  word  and  sentence,  141 
Firm,  as  Western  symbol,  490 
Fiaminius,  C.,  significance,  65;  conquest,  408; 

and  finance,  410,  41 1;  and  party,  451 
Fiaminius,  T.  Quinctius,  and  political  organiza- 
tion, 451 

Flavius,  Cncius,  son  of  freedman,  i66«.;  consul- 
list,  409W. 

Force,  alteration  in  concept,  307;  Western 
dynamic  Rationalism,  309.  See  also  Motion; 
Technique 

Foreign  relations,  unilateral  law,  364-366;  in 
conflict  of  estates  and  State,  367;  importance 
of  inner  authority,  369;  as  field  of  high  poli- 
tics, 440,  447;  war  as  primary  relation,  440. 
See  also  Peace;  War 

Form,  being  “in  form,”  330;  of  historical  move- 
ment, 361;  family  and  State,  361;  Civilization 
and  loss,  Caesarism,  398,  404,  406,  418,  431; 
economic  “ in  form,”  471 
Fortune,  as  displacing  possession,  483 
Fourier,  Francois  M.  G,,  and  English  economics, 

4^9 


Fourth  Estate,  significance,  358.  See  also  Crowd 
Fox,  Charles  James,  and  French  Revolution,  412. 
France,  Anatole,  on  law,  64;  and  moral,  zjzn. 
France,  sterility,  106;  national  origin,  i8x, 
Statcs-General,  373;  absolutism  and  Fronde, 
388,  390;  impractical  politics,  403;  financial 
and  military  rule,  415.  See  also  French  Revo- 
lution 

Francis  of  Assisi,  and  compassion,  2.73 
Franciscans,  as  urban,  91 
Francke,  August  H.,  Pietism,  308 
Franco-German  War,  German  bankers  and 
French  loans,  4ox«. 

Frangipani,  and  Papacy,  354 
Frankish  dynasty,  notion,  379^. 

Fratres  Arvales,  end  of  rccori,  X55;  rites,  314; 

formal  restoration,  433 
Frau  Hoide,  and  Mary-cult,  X99 
Frederick  I Barbarossa,  and  Henry  the  Lion, 
i8o«. 

Frederick  11,  emperor,  and  finance,  372.,  489 
Frederick  the  Great  of  Prussia,  and  conscription, 
4io«.;  tact  of  command,  444;  economics  and 
politics,  475 

Frederick  William  of  Brandenburg,  as  real  ruler, 

389 

Frederick  William  I of  Prussia,  and  army,  415; 

as  politician,  443;  finance,  489 
Frederick  William  III  of  Prussia,  and  army,  406 
Freedom,  rise  of  idea,  significance,  354,  356, 
358;  as  negation,  456;  and  money,  484«. 
French  Revolution,  and  dynastic  idea,  183; 
political  significance,  387;  struggle  for  in- 
ternal control,  398;  not  economic,  399»-; 
and  mob,  400;  English  ideas  and  practices, 
403,  4x1,  4iz;  as  unique,  411;  and  set  of  inci- 
dents, 4ii«. 

Frobenius,  Leo,  on  primitive  Culture,  33 ; on  Ara- 
bian “cavern,”  133 

Fronde,  significance,  386,  404;  European  ab- 
solutism, 388;  principle  in  Thirty  Years’ 
War,  389;  struggle  elsewhere,  outcome,  390, 
404;  period  in  Arabian  Culture,  413 
Fugger,  city  nobility,  356;  small-scale  traffic,  48  in. 
Function,  Western  money  concept,  486,  489 
Furniture,  race  in,  iii 

Gaia  cult,  z83 

Gaius,  Institutes,  67 

Galba,  unimportance,  50 

Gallienus,  mounted  corps,  199;  history  less,  43Z 

Gamaliel,  influence,  X09 

Gao-dsung,  and  Nestorians,  x6o 

Gathas,  Gnosis,  xx8 

Gclnhausen,  cathedral  art,  1x3 

Gelon,  and  Syracuse,  }Szn. 


INDEX 


xii 

Genealogy,  and  fear,  z6^;  time-mythology, 
x86;  as  Western  principle,  350;  and  Chinese 
ancestry- worship,  351;  inherited  will,  377; 
and  money,  449«5.  See  also  Dynastic  idea 
Genesis,  influences,  xo9». 

Georgia,  State  religion,  2.53 
Germanic  law,  development,  75,  76 
Germany,  and  Roman  law,  76,  77;  and  Western 
Civilization,  109;  dynasty  and  nationalism, 
181-183;  politics,  army,  and  administration, 
415,  444;  character  of  constitution  of  1919, 
457«.  See  also  Holy  Roman  Empire;  Prussia 
Gesture,  as  sign  of  language,  punctuation,  134; 

and  words,  i^on. 

Ghassanids,  court,  poetry,  198 
Ghetto,  as  Jewish  mode,  3 1 5 , 3 17 
Giotto,  as  Gothic,  191 

Gnosis,  and  Chaldean,  176;  Eastern  and  West- 
ern forms,  12.9,  X5o 
Godwin,  William,  and  Third  Estate,  403 
Goethe,  Johann  Wolfgang  von,  and  cosmic  beat, 
5;  historical  attunement,  30;  form-fulfilment 
theory,  31,  3i«.;  on  parts  of  a Culture,  37«.; 
on  world-literature,  108;  form  and  untruth, 
lyjn.;  on  German  nationalism  and  poetry, 
i8i;  on  freedom,  2.67;  on  confession,  2.95; 
on  doer,  44a;  on  book-keeping,  490 
Gold  reserve  and  standard,  and  credit,  49i«. 

See  also  Money 
Golden  Age,  Classical,  a39 
Gomdan,  stronghold,  197 
Good,  as  evaluation,  2.4i«. 

Goods,  early  traffic,  480 
Goslar,  cathedral  art,  1x3 
Gospels,  fictitious  authorship,  jzn.;  character, 
xix;  picture,  zijn.;  Mark,  zzy^  John, 

Z34,  Z44,  Z45,  Z50;  warrantry,  z48 
Gothic,  as  cosmic,  9z,  93;  cathedral,  izz,  1x3, 
153;  and  Baroque  science,  zyo;  Renaissance 
as  return,  Z9 1 ; and  personality,  Z93;  and 
Reformation,  ^96;  result  on  Jews  of  contact, 
3i7”3i9i  and  technique,  501,  503 
Gould,  Benjamin  A.,  on  American  race,  119 
Government,  Politics 
Gracchi,  importance,  47,  50;  and  rural  citizens, 
584W.;  financing,  4oz;  and  money,  410, 
494;  disorders,  4x3;  and  Tribunate,  433;  and 
party,  451;  and  political  theory,  454;  and 
electorate,  457^2.7  and  courts,  460 
Grace,  plurality  of  idea,  59;  as  Arabian  doctrine, 
Z34,  X41,  z4z;  Western  concept,  Z9Z 
Grammar,  sentence  and  word,  141,  145;  and 
syntax,  14Z;  lost  origin,  146;  and  vocabu- 
laries as  basis  of  linguistic  families,  147; 
Indogermanic,  148;  and  writing,  149 
Granada,  as  world-city,  99;  Jewish  city,  316 


Gratian,  Decretum,  77,  Z90 
Great  Protectors,  Chinese  period,  40 
Great  Wall,  contemporary,  41 
Greek,  as  language  of  Christianity,  1x4,  X5X, 
X56;  as  Roman  language,  395«. 

Greek  fire,  purpose,  50x22. 

Greek  Orthodox  Church,  picture  series,  116. 
See  also  Christianity 

Greeks,  no  nation,  173;  as  adherents  of  Syn- 
cretic cults,  176;  as  Christian  Church,  177; 
modern,  security  as  Byzantine  relic,  3x3 
Gregory  VII,  pope,  and  world-power,  373 
Gregory  of  Tours,  history  and  Karamzin's 
narrative,  19X;  religiousness,  X77 
Groot,  Jan  J.  M.  de,  mistake  on  Chinese  re- 
ligions, x86?2. 

Grosseteste,  Robert,  philosophy,  822,,  lyxw.; 

as  scientist,  300 
Gudunov,  Boris,  period,  19X 
Guilds,  status,  and  tribal  organization,  348 
Gundisapora,  school,  zoo;  location,  xoo?2. 
Gunpowder,  and  printing,  460;  Chinese  dis- 
covery, 50122.;  and  Greek  fire,  50x22. 

Habsburgs,  and  Austrian  nation,  i8x;  and 
world-history,  336 
Hadramaut,  Axumite  kings,  19722. 

Hadrian,  legal  edict,  66 
Hague  Conference,  as  prelude  of  war,  430 
Halakha,  Jewish  and  Christian,  xxi 
Hallgerd,  as  destiny,  3x9 
Halo,  significance,  378 

Haly burton,  Thomas,  on  divine-given  torments, 
X9922. 

Hamdanids,  rule,  197 

Hamiicar  Barca,  Spanish  conquest,  408 

Hammurabi,  code,  7522. 

Han  dynasties,  41;  fall,  314 
Hanifs,  Puritanism,  304 

Hannibal,  and  Hellenism,  19 1,  4xx;  and  border 
States,  408 

Hansa,  small-scale  traffic,  48122. 
Haoma-drinking,  X03,  xoy 
Hasidim,  sect,  X55,  3x1 
Hatshepsut,  and  %yptian  history,  434 
Hauran,  feudalism,  196 

Heaven,  Arabian  and  Western,  X9X;  Western 
and  Russian,  X9522. 

Hebrew,  fate  of  spoken  and  written,  7322. 

Hegel,  Georg  W.  F.,  and  law  of  nature,  78;  and 
numbers,  X6922. 

Hellenes,  as  name,  161,  173 
Hellenism,  as  fellah,  185;  and  Cann^  and  Zama, 
19 1,  4xx;  Paganism  and  Christianity,  X03, 
X04;  materialism  and  myth,  310.  See  also 
Pseudomorphosis 


3111 


INDEX 


Helots,  status,  311, 349;  attempt  to  emancipate, 
357 

Henotheism,  Arabian,  aoi.  See  also  Religion 
Henry  IV,  emperor,  contemporaries,  39 
Henry  VI,  emperor,  and  world-power,  374 
Henry  VII  o£  England,  dynasty-idea,  381 
Hermes  Trismegistus,  fictitious,  jui. 

Hermetic  Poemander,  2.i3«. 

Hermetics,  collection  as  canon,  147;  period, 
^50 

Hermopolis,  cult,  179,  a8i 
Hero,  and  technique,  501 
Herod,  Hellenism,  xii 

Herodotus,  on  Persians,  i6y;  inaccuracy  on 

Egypt.  333 

Heroism,  and  race,  339;  hero-death,  471 
Herrnhut,  Pietism,  308 

Hesiod,  and  Classical  religious  beginnings,  z8i 
Hia  dynasty,  mythology,  a86,  379«. 

Hiang-Sui,  peace  league,  419 
Hidalgo,  meaning,  }4in. 

Hierocies,  breviary, 

Hijra,  era,  139 

Himaryites,  history,  i97«.;  Jewish  State  re- 
ligion, 153 

Hinayana  doctrine,  }iz 
Hippodamus  of  Miletus,  city-plan,  100 
History,  and  cosmic  and  microcosmic,  X3,  24; 
adjustment  to  horizon,  cultural  aspect,  14,  z^; 
subjective  basis,  16,  z^;  cultural  history-pic- 
tures, ay,  a8;  Western  Culture  and  infinite, 
irrational  culminativc  division  scheme, 
37»  55>  190;  Western  Culture  and  indi- 
viduality in  historical  attunement,  planes,  z^; 
future  uniform  physiognomic,  30;  enlarged 
possibilities,  restoration  and  prediction,  36; 
Cultures  and  significance,  44;  true  definition 
and  treatment,  physiognomic  fact,  46,  47; 
biological  sense  of  primitive,  48;  and  final 
objects,  48;  Cultures  and  historical  man,  48; 
exhaustion  of  Civilization  and  historylessness, 
48-51;  actualization  of  the  spiritual,  49; 
intra-  and  intercultural,  55;  cultural  plurality, 
soul  and  transfer  of  form,  55-60;  importance 
of  negative  cultural  influences,  57-59;  cul- 
tural transfer  of  Christianity  as  example,  59, 
60;  of  Roman  Law  as  example,  60-83;  city’s 
**  visage”  as,  94;  and  classes,  96;  and  Civili- 
zation, superficial,  109,  339;  and  race,  116; 
and  writing,  150,  153;  relation  to  people, 
165,  169,  170,  181;  and  nations,  171;  and 
faith  and  science,  zyx;  and  moral,  171;  of 
truths,  X74;  Western  sense,  influence  of  con- 
trition, Z94;  intercultural  dissonance,  319; 
sex  war,  3x8;  cosmic-politic  duality,  family 
and  State,  319;  ”in  form”  estates  and  mak- 


ing, 330;  cultural  tradition,  338;  being- 
streams  as  true,  339;  and  State,  361;  as  court, 
high  decision,  507.  See  also  Being;  Cultures; 
Destiny;  Landscape;  Nature;  Politics;  Race; 
Sex;  Time 

Hogarth,  William,  art  sermons,  116 
Hohenstaufens,  results  of  fail,  18 1 
Hohenzollerns,  and  Prussia,  i8z 
Holy  Roman  Empire,  significance,  181;  elec- 
torate, 373;  world-power  and  contest  with 
Papacy,  373,  374;  decay,  376;  Thirty  Years’ 
War,  Wallenstein,  388-391;  provincial  hori- 
zons, 39Z 
Holy  Synod,  178 

Homer,  urban  language,  iz^^n.;  indifference  to 
religion,  z8i;  feudal  evidences,  374;  and 
talent,  486 

Ho-nan-fu,  as  royal  residence,  91 
Honour,  and  class,  34^;  as  basic  concept  of 
ethics,  343;  in  economic  life,  471 
Hortem,  Max,  on  popular  Islam,  Z37». 
Horus-hawk  cult,  end,  Z79,  373 
Hou-li,  as  religious  source,  z86 
House,  Minoan  and  Myccnasan,  88;  farmhouse 
as  symbol,  90;  mcgalopoHtan,  99;  and 
architecture,  izo;  as  expression  of  race,  izo- 
izz;  as  totem,  history,  izi;  and  ornament, 
izi;  and  family,  319;  political  and  economic 
expression,  471 
Hsinan-tang,  in  India,  107 
Hugo  de  St.  Victor,  Arabian  contemporaries,  150 
Huguccio,  pun,  77W. 

Humanism,  field,  z^m.  See  also  Renaissance 
Humboldt,  Wilhelm  von,  on  language,  iiyn.;  and 
State,  366^./  on  politics  and  literature,  439«. 
Hume,  David,  and  economic  thought,  403,  469 
Hunac  Ccel,  rule,  45 
Hunger-death,  471 

Huns,  Chinese  repulse  and  Western  attack,  41 

Hus,  John,  and  reform,  Z96 

Huxley,  Thomas  H.,  race  classification,  115 

Hwang  of  Tsi,  as  protector,  388 

Hwang-ti,  rise,  38;  as  title,  41;  cult,  314; 

economics  and  politics,  475 
Hybrias  the  Cretan,  and  carp  diem,  383 
Hybris,  doctrine,  z8z,  301 
Hyksos  Period,  meaning,  38,  41;  preliminaries, 
386;  and  Csesarism,  4Z7;  as  term,  4z8«.; 
and  political  theory,  453 
Hypothesis,  and  usefulness,  144 
Hyreanus,  Hellenism,  zii 

lamblichus,  and  Pagan  Church,  Syncretism, 
Z04,  z5z;  on  divine  substance,  Z56;  and  num- 
bers, z69«. 

Ibas,  and  substance  controversy,  Z56 


INDEX 


xiY 

Ibn  Sina,  style  of  caaoiij  346 
Ibsen,  Henrik,  and  marriage,  105 
Ice  Age,  man  in,  33 
Iconoclasm.  See  Images 
Ilya  Muromyets,  hero,  192 
Images,  in  Pagan  churches,  2.04;  basis  of  wor- 
ship, ^56;  Arabian  and  Greek  iconoclasm, 
304,  42.5.  See  also  Monophysites 
Immaculate  Conception,  as  English  idea,  2.94». 
Immortality,  cultural  basis,  59.  See  also  Death 
Imperialism,  Chinese,  38,  41;  Indian,  41/2.; 
collapse  of  Roman,  41;  Calvin-Loyola  strug- 
gle, Z99;  political  aspect  of  Classical  con- 
quests, 407;  cultural  necessity,  4zx.  See  also 
Politics 

Indian  Culture,  ahistoric,  and  script,  36,  150, 
15X;  problems  of  study,  38;  and  Imperialism, 
4IW.;  fate  in,  beginning  of  religion,  z8i; 
Rationalism,  307;  style  of  priesthood,  35Z; 
relation  of  primary  estates,  353;  and  world- 
power,  373?2.  See  also  Buddhism;  Cultures 
Indians,  and  Americans,  119;  gesture  language, 
i4o«.,  147 

Indogcrmanic  system,  alien  words,  148;  youth, 
question  of  grammar,  148;  effect  of  ahistoric 
Cultures,  150;  basis  of  coherence,  166;  and 
Persians,  166-169;  and  Western  genealogical 
ideal,  181 

Industry,  Economics;  Technique 
Infinity,  in  Western  Culture,  46.  See  also  Depth- 
experience 

Innocent  III,  pope,  and  world-power,  374;  as 
politician,  44Z 

Inquisition,  and  Devil-cult,  Z91 
Inscriptions,  as  taboo,  izi». 

Insula  Fclicula:,  loi 

Intelligence,  as  tension,  loz;  language  as  vehi- 
cle of  dominance,  144,  145;  and  race-traits, 
166;  aristocracy,  i66».;  and  cosmopolitanism, 
184;  Jesus  and,  zi6-zi8;  Paul’s  introduction 
into  Christianity,  zzi;  Jewish  period,  316; 
and  primary  estates,  356,  357;  and  Cassarism, 
433.  Causality;  Knowledge;  Ration- 

alism; Thought;  Town;  Understanding; 
Waking-being 

International  law,  and  Roman  jus  gentium^  61. 

See  also  Vottign  relations 
Internationalism,  as  element  of  Jewry,  3Z0 
Interregnum,  cultural  period,  significance,  375 
Interrex,  and  oligarchy,  375 
Inventions,  Western,  501-  *5*^^  also  Technique 
Ionic,  as  microcosmic,  9z 
Ipsus,  battle,  importance,  4ZZ 
Irak,  slave-rebellion,  4Z6,  4z8«. 
irenaeus,  and  Western  Church,  ZZ9;  and  com- 
mentary, 247;  period,  Z50 


Irncrius,  and  Roman  law,  77 
Isaac  Hassan  (ibn  Sid),  as  scientist,  316 
Isaiah,  as  Arabian  prophet,  Z05 
Isidore,  biography,  Z5Z 
Isis  cult,  origin,  zoi,  310 

Islam,  as  Puritanism,  74,  30Z-304;  and  nation- 
ality, 178;  Logos,  Z36;  significance  as  term, 
Z40;  community  of  elect,  Z43;  and  substance 
controversy,  Z56;  Monophysites  and  starting 
point,  Z58;  missionarism,  Z59,  304;  earlier 
Arabian  religions  and  success,  z6o;  as  Arabian 
manifestation,  304;  feilahism,  315;  basis  for 
endurance,  3Z3;  political  aristocracy  of  begin- 
ning, 4Z4.  See  also  Arabian  Culture;  Mo- 
hammed; Religion;  Sufism 
Isocrates,  and  class  dictatorship,  404 
Israelites,  tribal  association,  175.  See  also  Jtwz 
Italy,  union  as  Germanic  dynastir.  creation,  181; 

city-republic  finance,  489 
Ivan  III,  and  Tartars,  19Z 
Ivan  IV,  the  Terrible,  period,  19Z 
I-Wang,  contemporaries,  39;  and  feudalism, 
349«->  375 

Jabna,  Council  of,  on  revelation,  245 
Jackson,  Andrew,  and  party,  451 
Jacoponc  da  Todi,  and  reform,  Z96 
Jainism,  Rationalism,  307 
James,  Saint,  Gospel,  zz3«. 

James  I of  England,  and  marriage-alliance,  389 
Jansenists,  Puritan  manifestation,  30Z 
Japan,  cultural  status,  4922.,  108,  3Z3,  4zi». 
Jason  of  Pherx,  politics,  407 
Jehuda,  Rabbi,  period,  Z50 
jehuda  ben  Halevi,  and  science,  315 
Jeremiah,  as  Arabian  prophet,  Z05 
Jerusalem,  relation  to  Jewry,  Z04,  zo8,  zio 
jespersen,  Otto,  on  origin  of  language,  138 
jesubocht,  Corpus,  75 
Jesuits,  as  urban,  9Z.  See  also  Loyola 
Jesujabh  III,  on  conversion  to  Islam,  z6o 
Jesus,  and  ceremonial,  13422.;  life  and  biography, 
ziz;  and  John  the  Baptist,  Mandxanism,  zi4; 
connotation  of  “Nazarene,”  Z1422.;  self-view 
as  prophet  and  Messiah,  zi  5;  townlcssness, 
Z15;  before  Pilate,  faith  and  fact,  zi6,  47322.; 
metaphysical  world,  Z17;  effect  of  Resurrec- 
tion, zi  8;  romances  of  birth  and  childhood, 
ZZ4,  Z37,  Z50;  world-image,  and  apocalyptic, 
Z37;  and  submission,  Z40.  See  also  Christi- 
anity; Logos;  Substance 
Jews,  creed  basis  of  law,  Talmud,  69;  juris- 
prudence, 71;  pre-cultural  law,  75;  comrade- 
ship and  race  in  European,  iz6,  IZ7;  tribal 
types,  175;  ignored  phases  of  religious  his- 
tory, 191;  crusade,  198;  yahweh  cult  in 


INDEX 


Syncretism,  loi;  Judaism  as  Arabian  prophetic 
religion,  2.04-2,07;  effect  of  exile,  apocalypse 
and  Persian  influence,  zoj;  Judaistic  minority, 
Talmudic  development,  ao8 ; Exiiarch  major- 
ity, 2.08,  xio;  law  and  the  prophets  as  separate, 
X09;  post-exilic  (springtime)  increase,  spirit, 
zo^,  316;  Judea  and  Jewry,  fall  of  Jerusalem 
as  liberation,  lo^-xii;  tendencies,  rescue 
from  pseudomorphic  Hellenism,  xio,  xii;  end 
of  apocalypse,  xii;  Judaism  and  exclusive 
Messiah,  Christian  sects,  disappearance,  X19, 
xxo,  X5X;  Paul  and  Judaism,  xxi;  era,  X39; 
and  revelation,  X45;  separation  of  Chris- 
tianity, X51;  missionarism,  X59;  Mazdak 
reformation,  end  of  theology,  x6i;  fellah- 
religion,  315,  3x3;  Arabian-type  nationality 
and  ghetto,  315,  317;  intellectual  (Baroque) 
period,  in  Spain,  316;  spiritual  character  of 
period,  316;  Civilization  period,  results  of 
contact  with  Gothic,  3 17-3 19;  race  and  piety 
phases  of  later  antagonism,  318-3x0;  landless 
consensus  and  Western  patriotism,  3x0;  fixed 
alien  metaphysic  phase,  3x1;  and  Western 
Civilization,  3xx;  danger  of  dissolution,  3x3; 
economic  rdle,  481??.;  and  machine-industry, 
504».  See  also  Arabian  Culture;  Religion 
Jezidi,  and  Trinity,  X3 6 

Joachim  of  Floris,  world-conception,  x8;  Ara- 
bian contemporaries,  X50;  and  reform,  X96 
Job,  Book  of,  character,  xo8;  and  will,  X4X 
John  Gospel,  xx6;  Mani  and,  xxy,  X5i».;  dual- 
ism, X34;  on  God  and  the  Word,  X44;  as  a 
Koran,  245;  and  Old  Testament,  245;  period, 
X50 

John  the  Baptist,  Mandseanism,  and  Jesus,  X14; 

order-community,  X54 
John  Tzimisces,  power,  4x6 
Josephus,  on  Sadduces,  zi  i 
Judah,  Abraham  and  betrayal  money,  X37 
Judaism.  T^^  Jews* 

Judge  of  men,  and  speech,  137 
Judith,  as  Arabian,  xo8 
Jugurtha,  power,  4x8 

Julian,  edict,  66«.7  and  cult  nation,  176,  X04; 
as  prophet,  X04;  and  Syncretism,  15  3;  and 
monasticism,  X54 

Jundaisapuf,  and  Gundisapora,  xoo«. 

Junian  Latins,  68«- 
Jupiter  Dolichenus  cult,  zoi 
Juridical  person,  as  Arabian  concept,  67,  68, 
i74»  177 

Jurisprudence,  as  late  science,  66;  Egyptian  and 
Chinese,  67;?.;  future  Western,  80-83, 

See  also  Roman  law 

Jus^  and  lex  in  Arabian  Culture,  71;  and 
in  Western  Culture,  78 


Jus  gentium.  Classical  idea,  61;  as  imperial  law, 
66 

Justification  by  faith,  and  Western  Rationalism, 

309_ 

Justinian,  Arabian  jurisprudence,  7o«.,  71,  74; 
army  system,  199;  Digests  as  interpretation, 
X46;  and  end  of  theology,  x6i;  Nika  Re- 
bellion, 38 1«./  conflict  with  nobility,  4x3 

Kabbalah,  and  secret  dogma,  X47 
Kalaam,  and  pneuma,  X4X 
Kama-sutram,  and  sport,  103 
Kanauj,  as  world-city,  99 
Kant,  Emmanuel,  and  numbers,  x69«.;  gloom, 
Z95;  and  Devil-cult,  303;  and  Talmudic 
intellects,  3xx;  on  marriage,  337;  and  celibacy 
of  science,  346 

Kara  Balgassun,  inscription,  160 
Karasi,  as  order,  X55;  Puritanism,  rise,  316 
Karamzin,  Nikolai  M.,  narrative,  19X 
Karlsruhe,  plan,  ioo?z. 

Karlstadt,  as  Gothic,  X96 
Kama,  and  civil  law,  xio 
Karo,  Joseph,  metaphysic,  3x1 
Karramiyy a movement,  4x4,  4x5 
Karun  valley,  Mandasanism,  xi4«. 

Kassites,  as  rulers,  40 

Khazars,  conversion  to  Judaism,  X59 

Khuzistan,  Mandasanism,  xi4«. 

Ki-Sung,  dynasties,  379W. 

Kierkegaard,  Soren,  “playing”  with  religion, 
137 

Kinnesrin,  school,  xoo 
Kiur  Zan,  power,  4x6 

Knowledge,  waking-being  and  problem  of 
epistemology,  14;  technical  and  theoretical, 
X5;  epistemology  and  destiny,  x67«.  See  also 
Intelligence 

Kobad  I,  and  Mazdak,  x6i 
Koran,  as  term,  X44.  See  alsold^m 
Kung-Yang,  on  Middle  Kingdom,  373W. 
Kwan-tse,  and  pre-Confuscian  philosophy,  300 
Kwei-ku-tsc,  character, 

Labna,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45 

Labor.  See  Economics 

Laity,  vis-^vis  clergy,  333 

Lakayata,  system,  309 

Lakhmids,  court,  poetry,  198 

Lambert,  fidouard,  on  Twelve  Tables,  65«. 

Land,  and  Classical  money  wealth,  487.  See  also 
Peasantry 

Landscape,  necessity  of  study  in  man’s  history, 
39W.;  of  Arabian  Culture,  4x;  relation  to 
Culture,  46;  and  transfer  of  forms,  $7;  and 
town,  90;  and  race,  113,  119,  1x9,  130;  and 


INDEX 


xvi 

language,  1 19;  and  plant  changes,  130;  and  re- 
ligions o£  Cultures,  2.78;  as  Chinese  prime 
symbol,  zSy 

Language,  and  emancipation  of  understanding, 
9;  of  Civilization,  108;  defined,  develop- 
ment, 1 14,  115;  and  race  and  waking-being, 
1 14,  117;  expression  and  communication, 
‘T’  and  “thou,”  motive  and  sign,  115,  133; 
cult-colouring  of  prime  words,  116;  and  ta- 
boo, 116;  and  speaking,  dead  languages,  117, 
1x5;  independence  from  landscape,  mother- 
tongue  fallacy,  119;  essence,  wordless,  131, 
13x5  essential  clement  of  relations  of  micro- 
cosm, 13X;  phases  of  expression,  extensive- 
ness, 134;  evolution  of  communication,  134; 
speech  divorced  from  speaking,  rigid  signs  as 
system,  134,  144;  “knowing”  the  language, 
complexity,  135;  set  language  and  under- 
standing, 135;  signs  and  meaning,  relation 
to  truth,  136,  137;  “playing”  with  expres- 
sion, 137;  spiritual  communion  and  silence, 
137;  words,  origin,  incompleteness,  137,  138, 
14X;  vocal  and  verbal,  138-  name  and  word, 
138--141;  opposite  word-pairs,  140;  Chinese 
voice-differentiations,  140M./  grammar  and 
sentence,  relation  to  word,  14 1;  sentences  and 
race,  14X;  acquisition  of  words,  14X;  verbs 
and  thought-categories,  143;  abstract 
thinking  and  intellect  and  life,  144;  stages 
of  history,  145;  lost  formative  history,  146; 
as  ancient  class-secret,  146;  tempo  of  history, 
effect  of  writing,  147;  grammar  and  vocabu- 
lary, linguistic  families  as  grammatical,  147; 
alien  words,  148;  as  to  Aryan,  149;  written 
and  colloquial,  150;  morphology  of  Culture- 
languages,  15X-155;  birth  of  cultural,  popu- 
lar talk  and  cult  speech,  15  3->i5  5;  city  script- 
speech,  155;  and  people,  161;  Persian,  166; 
mother  tongue  and  dynastic  idea,  1837  and 
literary  history,  190;  influence  on  Christi- 
anity, iX4,  X4i«.,  X5X,  X56,  X58;  of  Arabian 
religions,  See  also  Literature;  Race; 

Words;  Writing 

Lao-tse,  Taoism,  307;  Pietism,  308 

Lao-Tzu,  and  sterility,  105 

Lassalic,  Ferdinand,  and  class  dictatorship,  404; 

and  English  economics,  469 
Latin,  disappearance  from  legal  life,  75;  and 
Western  scholar-languages,  155;  and  Chris- 
tianity, X58;  period,  395». 

Latin- America,  and  Cassarism,  435 
Law,  property  as  power,  345;  defined,  363;  as 
instrument  of  power,  internal  and  external, 
363-365 . See  also  Jurisprudence;  Roman  law 
League  of  Nations,  Chinese  attempt,  38,  41:7, 
4x9 


ILcaming,  separation  from  priesthood,  345; 
priesthood  and  cultural  form  of  profane,  345- 
347;  and  nobility  and  economics,  347 
Lc  Bon,  Gustave,  study  of  the  crowd,  i8«. 
Lcchfcld,  battle,  X59 
Leibniz,  Baron  von,  and  evolution,  31 
Leiden  Papyrus,  on  Hyksos  Period,  4x7 
Lemnos,  inscription,  ixi 
Lcnel,  Otto,  on  Roman  jurisprudence,  67 
Lenin,  Nikolai,  as  mass-leader,  448«.  See  also 
Bolshevism 

Leo  III,  emperor,  legislation,  75,  357;  icono- 
clasm,  304 

Leo  V,  and  Theodore  of  Studion,  4x5 
Leonardo  da  Vinci,  and  Gothic,  X91 
Leonardo  Pisano,  on  accountancy,  489«. 
Leontini,  destruction,  405 
Lessing,  Gotthold  E.,  and  German  nationalism, 
i8x;  and  Rationalism,  305 
Letter,  as  language-picture,  134.  See  also 
Writing 

Levites,  as  term  for  priesthood,  175 
Lex,  and  jus,  Arabian,  71 
Lex  MhuHa,  and  present  law,  fix 
Ixx  Canuleia,  397 
Lex  Hortensia,  358,  396 
Lex  Ogullnia,  and  Plcbs,  408 
Li-Ki,  ritual  work,  315 

Li  Si,  standard  script,  1 5X 
Li-Szu,  and  Wang-Cheng,  41 
Li-Wang,  problem,  38;  flight,  376 
Libyan  problem,  ifix 

Lidzbarski,  Mark,  on  Jesus  as  Mandxan,  zi4n. 
Lies,  and  set  language,  136,  137 
life.  See  Being;  Death;  Sex;  Waking-being 
Light.  See  Sight 
Limes,  Great  Wall  as,  41 
List,  Friedrich,  relation  to  property,  345;  and 
English  economics,  469 

Literature,  rural  and  urban,  93;  of  Culture  and 
Civilization,  107;  German  and  nationalism, 
i8x;  and  cosmopolitanism,  185;  Arabian 
research,  190;  and  language  history,  190; 
hero-tales,  19X;  Arabian  Minnc,  and  epic, 
198,  150;  Chinese  drama,  x8fi;  Byzantine 
and  Arabian,  304 
Livy,  and  polis,  383 
Lo-Yang,  as  royal  residence,  9X 
Locke,  John,  and  Continental  Rationalism,  308 
Logic,  and  opposites,  141;  and  truth,  144;  and 
history,  144 

Logos,  John  Gospel,  xifi;  Pseudomorphic  and 
Arabian,  X19;  jezidi  view,  X36;  Arabian 
indwelling  of  spirit,  Hght-sensation,  X36,  z^y; 
alteration  in  concept,  307.  See  also  Trinity 
I-ombarda  code,  76 


INDEX 


London,  as  world-city,  99 
Lorraine,  as  name,  1 6i,  i8 1 
Louis  XI  of  France,  dynasty-idea,  381 
Love,  and  cosmic  beat,  166;  and  religion,  faith, 
x65,  x66;  and  stability,  175;  cultural  re- 
ligious, 179;  and  nobility,  351 
Loyalists,  American,  4ii«. 

Loyola,  Ignatius,  on  moral,  lyx;  as  Gothic, 
x96;  and  world-politics,  Z99;  Puritanism,  302. 
Lii-pu-Wei,  Syncretism,  3ix«. 

Lii-Shi  Chun-tsiu,  31m 
Lucca,  Caesar  *s  politics,  446 
Luceres,  tribe,  351,  381 

Lui-Sfai,  and  Wang-Cheng,  41;  as  statesman, 
418,419;  tutor,  4i9». 

Lukka,  as  name,  164 

Luschan,  Felix  von,  ethnological  research,  1x9 
Luther,  Martin,  as  Gothic,  X96;  as  urban  monk 
and  schoolman,  X97,  X98;  and  Devil-cult,  X99; 
lack  of  practicality,  X99;  and  science,  300 
Lycurgus,  laws,  64,  65 
Lyell,  Sir  Charles,  theory  as  English,  31 
Lysander,  and  army,  406;  as  victor,  41X 
Lysias,  on  speculators,  484 

Macedonians,  as  rulers,  40;  schools  and  nation- 
alism, i6zn.;  and  Arabian  Culture,  189.  See 
also  Alexander  the  Great 
Machiavellism,  and  factions,  448 
Machine.  See  Technique 
Macrocosm,  animal’s  microcosmic  relation,  3, 
4,  15;  man’s  self-adjustment,  14.  See  also 
Cultures;  History;  Microcosm;  Morphology; 
Nature;  Waking-being 
Madrid,  as  provincial  city,  99 
Mxlius,  Sp.,  movement,  397 
Magi,  as  term  for  priesthood,  175 
Magian  Culture.  See  Arabian  Culture 
Magic,  technique,  x68,  xyi 
Magna  Charta,  and  control  by  nobility,  373 
Magnesia,  battle,  4xx 

Magnitude,  Classical  money-concept,  486--489 
Mahavira,  Rationalism,  307 
Mahayana,  doctrine,  31X,  313 
Mahraspand,  Mazdaism,  X51 
Maimon,  Solomon,  and  Kant,  3XX 
Maimonides,  Moses,  world,  X4i«.y  collection 
of  dogmas,  315;  and  Spinoza,  3x1 
Ma’in,  Kingdom  of,  feud^ism,  196;  geography, 
i96«. 

Mamcrtincs,  as  people,  160 
Man,  lordship  of  sight,  visual  thought,  7-9; 
language  and  understanding,  theoretical 
thought,  9,  10;  and  fear  of  death,  15,  16; 
destiny  and  causality  types,  16-19;  refuta- 
tion of  Darwinism,  3X;  two  great  ages,  33; 


in  primitive  Culture,  33,  34;  effect  of  agri- 
culture, 89.  See  also  Animal;  Being;  Micro- 
cosm; Sex;  Waking-being 
Management,  American  development,  8x«-  See 
also  Technique 

Manchester  School,  and  Rationalism,  403 
Mandjcanism,  as  redemption-religion,  xi  3;  John 
the  Baptist  and  Jesus,  X14;  survival,  xi4«t./ 
disappearance,  X5X;  order-communities,  i54 
Maniakes,  Turk,  4x7^. 

Manichflcism,  and  Chaldean,  176;  origins,  X09, 
X51;  Logos  and  Paraclete,  xxy,  de- 

velopment, X51;  missionarism,  x6o;  Aibegcn- 
sians,  i6oK. 

Mannheim,  plan,  loon. 

Manufacturer,  as  economic  class,  478 

Manzikert,  battle,  4x7 

Mar  Shimun,  prince-patriarch,  177 

Marcianus,  and  dynasty,  379 

Marcion,  Bible  and  Church,  xx5~xx8,  145 ; 

period,  X50;  and  reform.,  X96 
Marcionites,  era,  X39 

Marcus  Aurelius,  as  episode,  171;  religiousness, 
313;  and  peace,  430;  Caesarism  and  Stoicism, 
434^- 

Marduk,  as  deity,  xo6 
Marib,  Congress  of  Princes,  197,  304 
Marinus,  as  biographer,  X5X 
Marius,  C.,  and  money,  410;  and  Cassarism, 
4x3;  and  party,  451 
Mark  Gospel,  XX3 
Market,  status,  91,  480 
Marozia,  as  destiny,  3x9 
Marriage,  law,  control  over  it,  78,  365;  Civili- 
zation type,  105;  defined,  344«.;  “in  form” 
relation,  36X 

Marx,  Karl,  and  Marxism,  and  property,  344; 
and  party,  450;  and  effective  theory,  454;  end 
of  influence,  454,  455 ; and  English  economics, 
469;  and  economic  classes,  478;  and  value, 
48x«.;  and  work,  49X;  in  Russia,  495«./  on 
machine-industry  as  bourgeois,  504^.  See 
also  Socialism 

Mary  of  England,  and  absolutism,  388 
Mary-cult,  Arabian  development,  XX4;  victory 
at  Ephesus,  X57;  Western  development,  x88; 
and  contrition,  X93;  effect  of  Reformation, 
X99  ^ 

Materialism.  See  Rationalism 
Mathematics,  and  religion,  'x68 
Matthew  Gospel,  Judaic  character,  VLon. 

Maule,  Sir  William  H.,  and  divorce  laws,  64W. 
Maurists,  and  orders  and  schools,  346 
Maurya  and  Sunga  dynasty,  and  Imperialism, 

4i«. 

Mavali,  and  revolution,  414 


INDEX 


xviii 

Maximilian  I,  emperor,  and  law,  76;  dynasty- 
idea,  380 

Mayan  Culture.  See  Mexican  Culture 
Mayapan,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45 
Mazarin,  Jules,  Cardinal,  power,  389;  and 
Fronde,  390 

Mazdaism,  and  chivalry,  198;  development, 
2.51;  as  State  religion,  153;  missionarism, 
2.60;  absorption,  2,60 

Mazdak,  reformation,  z6i;  and  Karramiyya 
movement,  4x4 
Mechanics.  See  Technique 
Medes,  as  rulers,  40;  as  people,  167 
Mediaeval  History,  as  term,  a8 
Medici,  city  nobility,  356;  economics  and 
politics,  475;  small-scale  traffic,  48 1». 
Medicine,  as  priesthood,  478». 

Medinet  Habet,  relief,  164^, 

Mediterranean  region,  influence  of  climatic 
change,  39^. 

Medrashim,  style,  346 

Mcgalopolitanism,  and  nomadism,  90;  and 
country,  94;  development,  and  provinces,  98, 
99;  absolute  intellect,  99;  city  planning,  100; 
future  Western,  loi;  Classical  inner-town, 
loi;  final  phase,  death,  102.,  107;  tension, 
loz;  sport,  103 ; and  sterility,  103-105;  and 
uniform  type,  108;  and  language,  155;  and 
cosmopolitanism,  184;  phase  in  Jewry,  317, 
318;  and  Fourth  Estate  and  mob,  358,  399; 
and  public  opinion,  400;  and  Caesarism,  431; 
and  economics,  484.  See  also  Town 
Megasthenes,  on  Calani,  175 
Mehlis,  C.,  on  Libyan  problem, 

Meifi,  constitutions,  372. 

Memory,  and  the  named,  140 
Meng  Tse,  materialism  and  myth,  310,  31X 
Mercenaries,  and  Cassarism,  4x8 
Messana,  democratic  triumph,  396 
Messiah,  as  common  Arabian  idea,  206;  of 
Mandxanism,  xi4;  attitude  of  Jesus,  115; 
effect  of  Resurrection,  ai8 
Metals,  primacy,  500.  See  also  Smith 
Metaphysics.  See  Philosophy;  Religion 
Methodism,  Pietism,  practicality,  308 
Mewes,  Rudolf,  on  weather  and  war,  392^. 
Mexican  Culture,  development,  43;  violent 
death,  43;  reconstruction  of  history,  44,  45; 
Civilization  and  Aztecs,  45;  jurisprudence, 
66;  depopulation,  106,  107;  religious  be- 
ginnings, 288;  fellah-religion,  315 
Mexico  City.  See  Tenochtitlan 
Meyer,  Eduard,  on  Persian  host,  4o».,  167;  on 
history,  47,  50;  error  on  Egyptian  nobility, 
35o«.;  correct  Egyptian  chronology,  ipqn,; 
mistake  on  Roman  Caesarism,  432^. 


Michael  III,  emperor,  and  Bardas,  426 
Michelangelo,  and  Devil-cult,  292 
Microcosm,  animal  as,  in  macrocosm,  3--5,  15; 
sense  as  organ,  6,  7;  waking-being,  7;  and 
cosmic  beat,  crowd,  18;  and  history  and  na- 
ture, 23,  24;  and  megalopolitanism,  90; 
language  as  essential  element,  132;  and  sex, 
327;  and  Western  technique,  504.  See  also 
Animal;  Cosmic;  Waking-being 
Middle  Kingdom,  Chinese,  and  world-power, 
373 

Middle  Kingdom,  Egyptian,  significance,  387 
Middleman,  as  economic  class,  478;  as  economic 
master,  483,  484;  as  agent  of  Western  tech- 
nique, 504.  See  also  Economics;  Money 
Migrations,  and  peoples,  162-165;  small  bands, 
163,  167 

Miletus,  style  of  school,  345 
Mill,  John  Stuart,  and  Pascal,  273 
Milton,  John,  and  concepts,  303 
Minseans,  tribal  association,  174 
Ming-Chu,  period,  40,  387 
Ming-ti,  as  ruler,  41 
Minnesanger,  Arabian,  198 
Minoan  art,  and  Mycense,  87-89;  as  Egyptian, 
88 

Mir,  status,  348 

Mirabeau,  Comte  de,  on  law  of  nations,  366 
Mirandola,  Francesco  della,  and  Devil-cult,  291 
Mirian  of  Georgia,  State  religion,  253 
Mirza  Ali  Mohammed,  Gnosis,  228 
Mishnah,  completion,  71;  development,  208; 

as  commentary,  247;  origin,  316 
Missionarism,  Arabian,  259;  Islam,  304; 

Pythagorean,  307;  Jewish,  318 
Mithraism,  as  military  order,  198,  254;  in 
Syncretism,  201,  253;  and  Essenes,  21 1; 
liturgy,  213W.;  provenance,  3 14«. 
Mithridates,  cultural  basis  of  wars,  318,  yzin. 
Mitteis,  Ludwig,  on  Constantine’s  legislation, 
"jom. 

Mob.  See  Crowd 
Modern  History,  as  term,  28 
Mohammed,  predecessors  as  prophet,  204; 
Paul’s  analogy,  221;  as  Logos,  236;  and 
consensus,  243;  revelation,  244.  See  also 
Islam 

Moh-ti,  and  property,  344;  and  military  tech- 
nique, 42IW.;  and  politics,  453 
Mollahs,  law-men,  71 

Moltke,  Count  Hcllmuth  von,  leadership,  444 
Mommsen,  Theodor,  false  history,  50;  on 
political  character  of  Roman  Empire,  vj4n.; 
misunderstanding  of  Csesarism,  432;  and 
Varus’  defeat,  487 

Monarchy.  See  Dynastic  idea;  Politics 


INDEX 


Monasticism  (Asceticism),  Western  rural  and 
urban,  91,  ^97;  in  Paganism,  104;  character 
and  development  of  Arabian,  Z5  4;  Orphic, 
^83;  and  orgiasm,  183;  sage,  307 
Money,  as  urban,  abstract,  97,  98;  and  idea  of 
property,  357;  rise  as  political  force,  and 
Rationalism,  401,  402.;  in  English  politics, 
403;  and  class  dictatorship,  404;  in  Roman 
politics,  410,  411,  457-459;  Catsarism  and 
overthrow,  431,  433«.,  464,  506,  507;  and 
genealogy,  449«.;  and  democracy,  456;  in 
Western  politics,  and  press,  460,  46a;  and 
end  of  democracy,  463;  early  status  of  coin 
as  goods,  481;  beginning  of  concept  as  cate- 
gory, 481-484;  value-token  and  payment- 
medium,  483;  trader  as  master,  483,  484;  as 
power  of  Civilization,  485;  struggle  against, 
485;  and  mobility,  485;  money-mass  and 
value,  485W.;  cultural  symbols,  486;  Classi- 
cal magnitude  concept,  486,  495;  irrelation 
with  Classical  land  value,  487;  Classical 
slaves  as,  488,  496;  Western  function-concept, 
book-keeping,  489,  490;  Western  Culture 
and  metallic,  490,  491;  and  work,  quantity 
and  quality,  491-493;  capital,  cultural  basis, 
493;  financial  organization,  cultural  basis, 
494;  Russian  attitude,  495?2.;  struggle  with 
technique,  505;  and  Socialism,  ^o6n.  See 
also  Economics 

Monophysites,  importance,  47;  creed  basis  of 
law,  70;  as  nation,  177;  and  Mary-cult,  02.4; 
origin,  a57;  and  starting-point  of  Islam,  158; 
missionarism,  x6o;  and  reform, 

Monotheism,  relation  to  Arabian  Culture,  aoi«. 
Montanist  movement,  ijrj 
Morale.  Ethics;  Spirit;  Truth 
Mormons,  as  people,  160 
Morphology,  of  Culture  languages,  I5a-i55; 
of  peoples,  169;  of  religious  history,  2.75; 
of  social  history,  348;  of  economic  history, 
470,  476-480 

Mortgages,  Classical  land,  487??. 

Mortmain,  and  established  church,  sjjn.; 

in  Egypt,  375 
Moscow,  character,  194 
Mosque,  and  basilica,  130 
Mother  tongue,  fallacy,  izo;  and  dynastic- 
idea,  183.  See  also  Language 
Motherhood,  ‘ * versehen,  ’ ' iz6.  See  also  Dcm- 
cter;  Mary-cult;  Sex 

Motion,  as  problem  of  thought,  14-16;  Western 
concept  and  military  art,  4Z1;  money  and 
mobility,  485.  Technique 

Motive,  and  language,  133 
Muller,  Frederick,  race  classification,  iZ5 
“Mufti,"  71 


Muktara,  as  capital,  416 
Multiplication  table,  dynamics,  66». 

Murtada,  philosophy,  311 
Music,  basis  of  charm,  8;  in  English  Parlia- 
mentarism, 403 

Musonius  Rufus,  and  peace,  430 
Mutation  theory,  and  Darwinism,  31;  and 
Cultures,  33,  36 
Mutawakil,  palace,  ioo«. 

Mycenae,  and  Crete,  87-89;  and  beast-formed 
deities,  176 

Mysteries,  Classical,  Z03.  Religion 

Mysticism,  Sufism,  176,  zz8,  Z4z;  Arabian 
period,  zoo,  Z50;  John  Gospel  and  Christian, 
zz6;  longing  of  Western,  Z9Z;  of  Rationalism 
and  Pietism,  308;  Yesifah,  316;  fixed  Jewish, 
3Z1 

Myth,  as  theory,  and  cult,  z68,  499;  relation 
to  Greek,  Z84,  z86;  time  mythology,  z86;  of 
Western  springtime,  Z88-Z90;  modern  igno- 
rance of  it,  Z90;  and  Protestantism,  Z99 

Naasenes,  Book  of,  zi3«.,  Z5i«. 

Nabu-Nabid,  overthrow,  Z07 
Naganjuna,  Mahayana  doctrine,  313 
Nahua,  in  Mexican  Culture,  45 
Names,  and  words,  138-141;  and  spiritual 
change,  religion,  139;  and  the  enigmatic,  139; 
and  sentence,  141;  and  things,  148;  and 
people,  160;  and  technique,  499 
Napoleon  I and  Napoleonism,  and  dynastic- 
idea,  18 1 ; and  Desiree  Clary,  3Z9;  State- 
machine,  formlessness,  404,  405;  army  and 
personal  rule,  407;  and  military  mobility, 
4Z1;  ruthlessness  as  victor,  4zz;  and  Csesar- 
ism,  4z8;  as  destiny,  439/2.;  and  tact  of 
command,  444;  economics  and  politics,  475 
Naranjo,  and  Mexican  Culture,  44 
Narses,  expedition,  zoo 

Nation,  as  term,  170,  36Z;  destiny,  170;  and 
city-buildmg,  17 1;  separation,  17 1;  repre- 
sentation of  minority,  lyz,  180,  183,  184; 
character  of  Classical,  173;  of  Arabian, 
174-178;  of  Western,  178-184;  of  Chinese 
and  Egyptian,  178/2.;  language  basis,  con- 
tinued dynastic  feeling,  183;  nobility  as 
representative,  184;  cosmopolitanism,  in- 
telligentsia, and  pacifism,  184;  peace  and 
fcllahism,  185,  186;  rise  of  idea,  385.  See 
also  Politics;  Race 

Nationality,  Arabian  creed  basis,  69,  168,  zio, 
Z53,  Z54,  315,  317;  Arabian  cult,  and  world 
Christianity,  Z19 

Natural  science,  religious  basis,  13;  English 
type  of  causality,  31;  physiognomic,  31; 
refutation  of  Darwinism,  32.;  beginning  of 


XX 


INDEX 


Arabian,  200;  dispensation  and  law,  267; 
Western  Culture  and  practical  mechanics,  300; 
theoretical  basis  in  other  Cultures,  301;  as 
diabolical,  302;  Jewish,  316;  scientists  as 
priests,  478.  See  also  Ait;  Nature;  Technique 
Nature,  and  cosmic  and  microcosmic,  23,  24; 
adjustment  to,  cultural  development  and 
horizon,  25;  technical  and  theoretical 
knowledge,  25;  and  peasant,  89;  of  Rational- 
ism, 305-308.  See  also  Causality;  History; 
Natural  science 
Nazarene,  connotation,  2i4«. 

Nebo,  as  deity,  206 

Nebuchadnezzar,  heontheism,  prayer,  206 
Nehardea,  school,  200,  210;  as  capital  of 
Exilarch,  208 
Neo-Brahmanism,  315 

Neo-Platonists,  dualism,  234;  and  revelation, 
245;  period,  250;  as  order,  254 
Neo-Pythagorcans,  community,  204,  254;  and 
revelation,  245;  period,  250 
Nephesh,  connotation,  234;  soul  stones,  234«. 
Nero,  and  elections,  432;  and  ideologues,  434 
Nestorianism,  creed  basis  of  law,  70;  as  nation, 
177;  and  Mary-cult,  224,  257;]  formative 
influences,  228;  church  language,  252; 
second-century  beginnings,  2.^in.;  mission- 
arism,  260;  and  reform,  296 
New  Testament,  Marcion  as  creator,  226,  227; 
Marcion  and  Catholic,  228.  See  also  Bible; 
Christianity;  Gospels 
New  York,  as  world-city,  99 
Newspaper.  See  Press 
Ngi-li,  as  religious  source,  286 
Nicsea,  Council  of,  Constantine  and,  257; 

substance  controversy,  257,  276 
Nicephorus,  power,  426 
Nicholas  I,  pope,  and  world-power,  373 
Nicholas  of  Cusa,  as  Western,  ^i6n. 

Nicholas  of  Oresme,  as  scientist,  301 

Nicias,  treaty,  385 

Nicodemia,  as  capital,  191 

Nietzsche,  Friedrich  W.,  and  value  of  truth,  12; 

and  technique,  302;  on  duality  of  moral,  341 
Nika  Rebellion,  38 1«. 

Nirvana,  rationalistic  concept,  307 
Nishapur,  and  Gundisapora,  2oo«. 

Nisibis,  Jewish  defence,  198;  location,  loon. 
Nobility,  primary  estate,  97;  as  State,  172,  180, 
183,  367;  beginning  as  estate,  280;  relation  to 
other  estates,  334,  335;  symbolic  significance, 
being,  destiny,  335-337,  340;  and  family, 
336;  big  individuals  and  tradition,  338; 
dependence  of  politics  on,  339,  440;  and 
“training,**  340;  moral,  341;  and  idea  of 
property,  343;  and  learning,  347;  common 


cultural  land-bound  estate,  350;  cultural 
styles,  350,  351;  foci  of  feelings,  351,  352; 
conflict  with  priesthood,  352-354;  Classical, 
and  polis,  355;  city  movement,  effect,  new 
type,  355-357;  and  Third  Estate,  356;  State 
rule  by  minority,  370;  and  absolutist  State, 
400;  development  of  Roman  political,  409- 
41 1 ; and  political  Islam,  424;  and  party- 
form,  450.  See  also  Estates;  Feudalism; 
Oligarchy;  Politics 

Nomadism,  prc-cultural  and  mcgalopolitan,  89, 
90 

Normans,  development  of  law,  75;  and  finance, 
concept  of  money,  372,  489 
Northcliffe,  Viscount,  and  demagogy,  461,  463 
Novel,  as  megalopolitan,  93 
Novels,  Justinian’s,  71 

Number,  and  grammar,  146;  and  religion,  268; 
abstract,  and  abstract  money,  481,  482;  and 
technique,  499 
Numina,  naming,  139 

Objects  and  subjects,  369;  in  politics,  441; 

in  economics,  479,  493 
Occamists,  and  Copcrnican  system,  301 
Occupations,  status  of  classes,  and  primary 
estates,  333,  348.  See  also  Economics 
Odoaccr,  historyless,  432 
Oetinger,  Friedrich  C.,  Pietism,  308 
Officialdom,  common  cultural  development, 
350;  rise  of  financial,  371;  Classical  tenure 
and  choice,  380,  383 
Oigur  realm,  Manichxism,  260 
Old  Kingdom,  as  Gothic,  296;  money  concept, 
489«. 

Old  Testament,  and  Christian  canon,  221,  225, 
226,228,245.  See  also 
“ Old  Women,”  as  phrase,  329«. 
Oldenbarneveldt,  Jan  van,  power,  389 
Oldendorp,  Johann,  and  law  of  nature,  78 
Oligarchy,  early  Roman,  375,  382;  and  polls, 
380-382;  and  Reformation,  386«.jr  Classical 
democratic  contentions,  394-398. 

Nobility 

Olivarez,  Count,  power,  389 
Oman,  Charles  W.  C.,  on  Byzantine  army  sys- 
tem, i99«. 

Omar,  Puritanism,  304 

Ommaiy ads,  overthrow,  424 

Onate,  Conde  de,  power,  389 

Onias,  and  the  “ Law,”  209 

Opposites,  word  pairs  and  logic,  140 

Oresme.  See  Nicholas  of  Oresme 

Orientation,  defined,  133 

Origen,  Scholasticism,  229;  period,  250 

Ornament,  as  taboo,  121;  cathedral  as,  123; 


INDEX 


and  secular  buildings,  1x3;  as  expression- 
language,  134;  script  as,  151;  and  number, 
x68;  priesthood  as,  337 

Orphism,  and  Classical  religious  beginnings, 
x8x;  asceticism,  X83;  and  reform,  156;  and 
Tyrannis,  386 
Ofvicto,  frescoes,  X9X 
Orsini,  and  Papacy,  354 
Orthodoxy,  and  Arabian  State,  177 
Osrhocne,  conversion,  177,  X53 
Ostrogoths,  as  episode,  171 
Othman,  war  with  Ali,  424 
Otto  I,  and  world-power,  373 
Otto  11,  and  Byzantium,  87 
Outsiders,  dediticii  peregrins,  6Sn. 

Oxenstierna,  Count  Axel,  power,  389 

Pa  Period,  387 

Pachomius,  and  monasticism,  ^54 
Pacioli,  Luca,  book-keeping,  490 
Psetus,  Thrasea,  death,  434 
Paganism,  struggle  with  Christianity,  loi. 
See  also  Hellenism;  Pseudomorphosis;  Syn- 
cretic Church 

Paine,  Thomas,  and  Third  Estate,  403«. 
Painting,  modern  as  dishonest,  136 
Pais,  Ettore,  on  Twelve  Tables,  6^n. 
Palaeontology,  refutation  of  Darwinism,  31 
Palcnque,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45 
Paiey,  William,  and  Third  Estate,  403??. 
Palmyra,  inscriptions,  xo6 
Pan  Ku,  myth,  311 

Papacy,  pope  and  councils,  59;  as  English  idea, 
X94«,;  family  history,  337;  and  dynamic 
space,  35X;  idea  and  facts,  354;  control  of 
Curia,  370;  world-power  and  contest  with 
Empire,  373,  374;  clerical  nobility  and  pope, 
374;  decay,  376.  See  also  Roman  Catholic 
Church 

Paper,  Chinese  invention,  5oi«. 

Papias,  on  Jesus*  teachings,  xi7«. 

Papinian,  position  as  jurist,  71,  73 
Papirius  Carbo,  and  Crassius,  459 
Paraclete,  doctrine,  xx7.  See  also  Trinity 
Paradosis,  in  Arabian  creeds,  xx8 
Paralii,  and  Tyrannis,  386 
Paris,  as  France,  95;  as  world-city,  99 
Parliamentarism,  character,  41X-415;  as  transi- 
tion, 415,  416;  as  seasonable  political  means, 
446.  See  also  Democracy;  England 
Parsees,  and  ghetto,  315;  security,  3x3 
Parshva,  Puritanism,  303 
Parthians,  and  Persians,  167;  chivalry,  198; 
wars  as  Jewish,  198 

Party,  place  in  politics,  449;  identity  with 
Third  Estate,  449;  nobility  and  forms,  450; 


XXt 

displacement  by  private  politics,  machine, 
45 X,  454,  464.  See  also  Politics 
Pascal,  Blaise,  and  Mill,  173;  and  Devil-cult, 
303 

Pataliputra,  as  world-city,  99;  abandoned,  107 
Patriotism,  Western  fatherland  concept,  179, 
183;  Jewish  attitude,  3x0 
Patrol-state,  366«. 

Paul,  Saint,  position  as  jurist,  71;  and  Christian 
Church,  xio,  xxi;  Mohammed's  analogy, 
XXI ; system  and  westward  trend  of  Christi- 
anity, xxi;  and  Mark  Gospel,  XX3;  and 
cults,  XX3;  and  Greek,  XX4;  dualism,  X34; 
substance  controversy  as  reversal  of  work, 
X58 

Paul,  Hermann,  on  sentence,  141 
Paulicians,  iconoclasm,  304 
Paullus,  L.  ^milius,  Pydna,  i^m. 

Pausanias,  and  helots,  357,  396 
Pavia,  and  legal  study,  76 
Pc-Ki,  as  general,  417;  overthrow,  419 
Peace,  Chinese  League  of  Nations  attempt,  38, 
417,  4x9;  and  fellahism,  185,  186;  Classical 
attitude,  385;  ruthless,  of  Caesarism,  qxx;  as 
unhistorical,  4x9,  434;  as  submission,  434,  441 
Peacock,  as  Arabian  symbol,  X36 
Peasantry,  as  plant,  89;  history  less,  cosmic,  96; 
and  religion,  x8o;  relation  to  primary  estates, 
vassalage,  348,  349;  reappearance  at  end  of 
Culture,  435;  lack  in  England  and  America, 
449».;  as  economic  class,  478.  See  also 
Being;  Country 

Pehlevi,  as  church-language,  X5X 
Pelasgi,  as  name,  161 

Pelham,  Sir  Henry,  money  in  politics,  403 
Pencstse,  status,  33X 

People,  false  idea,  113,  159;  as  conscious 
linkage,  159;  and  name,  160,  161;  and  lan- 
guage, 161;  and  provenance,  and  migration, 
i6x“i65;  and  race,  165;  as  soul  unit,  and 
events,  165,  169,  170;  Romans  and  Persians 
as  example,  166-169;  morphology,  169; 
creation  of  Western,  169;  as  product  of 
Culture,  169,  170;  characteristics  of  nations, 
170,  171;  of  West  as  result  of  events,  181; 
vis-^vis  nobility,  333;  rise  of  ideal  concept, 
393.  Race 

Pergamum,  revolt  of  Aristonicus,  454 
Pericles,  age,  391 
Peripatos,  style,  345 

Persecution,  contrast  of  Classical  and  Arabian, 
X03 

Persephone,  cult,  X83 
Perseus,  defeat,  i9o». 

Persians,  chronology,  xy;  as  rulers,  40;  lan- 
guage and  people,  166;  problem  of  origin  of 


xxii  INDEX 


religion,  168,  191;  cult  and  nationality',  168; 
religion  and  Jewish,  ^aJ;  and  revelation,  ^45; 
end  of  theology,  x6i;  Arabian-type  nation, 
ghetto,  315.  See  also  Arabian  Culture; 
Maisdaism;  Zarathusah 

Person,  Classical  notion,  60;  Arabian  concept 
of  incorporeal,  67,  68,  174,  177;  Classical 
concept  and  Western  law,  81,  81 
Personality,  and  contrition,  193;  Classical 
concept,  X93W*  See  also  Destiny;  Will 
Peruvian  Culture,  destruction,  46 
Peter,  Saint,  Gospel,  zi3«.,  Paul’s 

supersession,  ixi 

Peter  the  Great,  Petersburg  plan,  loxn.;  and 
Russian  pseudomorphosis,  19a 
Peter  Lombard,  and  sacraments, 

Petersburg,  plan,  loin.;  artificiality,  193 
Petrie,  W.  M.  Flinders,  error  on  Egyptian 
chronology,  4X7«. 

Petrus  Peregrinus,  as  scientist,  300;  and 
technique,  502. 

Phallic  cults,  183,  x86 

Pharaoh,  religious  position,  and  world- 

power,  373 

Pharisees,  tendency,  XII 
Pherecydes,  as  dogmatist,  x8x 
Philip  of  Macedon,  politics,  407 
Philip  II  of  Spain,  and  absolutism,  388 
Philip  IV  of  Spain,  and  world-power,  388 
Philippi,  battle,  and  Catsarism,  4x3 
Philistines,  migration,  164 
Philistinism,  and  Rationalism,  307 
Philo,  and  Christianity,  XX9;  dualism,  134 
Philology,  Arabian,  and  research,  191.  See  also 
Language 

Philosophy,  Buddhism  and  Indian,  49;  Western 
Culture  and  Classical,  57;  systematic,  and 
untruth,  Jesus  and  metaphysics,  xi6, 

iiy,  473W./  Western  swing,  306;  and  eco- 
nomics, 473.  See  also  Ethics;  Religion 
Phocas,  power,  4x7 
Phoenicians,  economic  role,  48 1«. 

Physical  geography,  Landscape 
Physiognomy,  and  race,  117.  See  also  Destiny 
Pi-Yung,  as  symbol,  xSy;  and  Shi-King,  35X; 
change,  357 

Picture,  and  expression-language,  116;  as  sign 
of  language,  letter,  134 
Piedras  Negras,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45 
Pietism,  cultural  manifestations,  308 
Pilate,  and  Jesus,  fact  and  faith,  ii6,  473 w. 
Pindar,  and  being,  X7X;  and  religion,  x8x 
Pisistratus,  and  oligarchy,  38X;  and  peasantry, 
386 

Piso,  conspiracy,  434 
Pistis-Sophia,  xi3». 


Pitt,  William,  and  French  Revolution,  41X 
Pittacus,  laws,  64 

Plant,  essential  character,  cosmic,  3,  4;  being, 
7;  and  race,  115;  effect  of  transplanting,  130; 
economic  life,  473;  and  technique,  499 
Plantagcnets,  early,  i8x«. 

Plato,  “ideas,”  58;  and  polis,  173^2 and  com- 
mentary, X47«.7  and  Orphism,  x8x;  cult,  314; 
theory  and  Syracuse,  454 
Play,  cosmic,  and  microcosmic  sport,  103.  See 
also  Sport 

Plebs,  political  rise  and  status,  349,  357,  408; 
and  political  nobility,  409-411 ; and  popuius, 
45 1«. 

Pliny,  on  depopulation,  106 
Plotinus,  Scholasticism,  XX9;  ecstacy,  X4X 
Pneuma,  as  Arabian  principle,  59;  and  law  of 
creed-communities,  68;  as  truth,  X41.  See 
also  Dualism 

Poetry,  Arabian  Minne,  198.  See  also  Literature 
Polis,  as  Classical  nation,  173;  and  nobility, 
oligarchy,  355,  381;  official  tenure  and  choice, 
380,  383;  synoecism  and  aristocracy,  381, 
38X;  civitas  and  hosHs,  384;  normal  war, 
385;  Tyrannis  and  non-estate  against  estates, 
386;  and  democracy,  387;  burgher  and  peas- 
ant, 396;  destruction  as  idea,  405;  and  sub- 
jugated territory,  407;  and  Imperialism,  4x3; 
and  Classical  finance,  494.  See  also  Politics 
Politics,  and  race,  116;  and  intercourse  by 
writing,  153;  and  social  ethics,  X73;  English, 
and  predestination,  304;  State  and  family, 
3x9,  336;  estates  as  term,  “in  form” 

estates,  330,  331;  as  war,  330,  366,  440,  474; 
estates  and  history  of  Cultures,  331;  estates 
and  residue  classes,  331-334;  three  estates 
and  non-estate,  interrelation,  334;  nobility 
and  priesthood,  symbolic  significance,  335, 
339,  340;  great  families,  basis  of  dynastic 
principle,  336;  priesthood  as  opposite,  337; 
big  individuals  and  tradition,  338;  as  life, 
dependence  on  nobility,  339,  440;  moral, 
341;  custom-ethic  and  honour,  34X,  343; 
relation  to  economics,  power  and  booty,  344, 
345,  474-476;  State  and  historical  stream, 
361;  nations  defined,  primary  estates  and 
State,  36X,  366;  and  care  and  opposition,  war 
as  creator  of  State,  36X;  State  as  inward  con- 
nection, custom-ethic  and  law,  363;  orders  of 
internal  law,  363;  power  and  law,  internal 
and  external,  363-366;  barrack-state,  366W,; 
State  control  of  external  position,  para- 
mountcy,  367;  State  and  nobility  as  cognate, 
367;  alienship  of  other  estates,  368;  factual 
control  and  truths,  368;  importance  of  leader- 
ship, subjects  and  objects,  368,  369,  441,  456; 


INDEX 


estate  rule  and  minority  within  class,  369,  370; 
interregnum  between  feudalism  and  State, 
375,'  rise  of  State  idea,  376;  individual  ruler, 
inherited  will  and  dynasty-idea,  376-378  ; 
Classical  oligarchy,  380;  rise  of  nation-idea, 
385  i estates  against  monarchy  and  non-estate, 
385-387;  non-estate  as  opposite  estate,  387; 
Chinese  and  Egyptian  absolutism,  387; 
Western  Fronde,  388-391,  404;  Western  ab- 
solutist period,  cabinet-politics,  391-394,  400; 
Classical  oligarchic-democratic-alternative 
period,  394-398;  of  Civilization,  non-estate 
as  independent  force,  398-400;  Ration- 
alism and  money  as  forces,  opposition  and 
dependence,  400-401,  455,  456;  Third  Estate 
in  England,  401,  403;  rational-money-class 
dictatorship,  anti-form,  403,  404;  character 
of  Second  Tyrannis,  405-408;  army  as  power, 
406;  polis  and  conquered  territory,  407; 
Roman  State  of  this  period,  408-411;  doc- 
trinaire Parliamentarism,  411-415;  its  decay, 
415,  416;  Fronde  period  in  Arabian  Culture, 
413;  Third  Estate  and  revolution  in  Arabian 
Culture,  414;  pre-Civilization  relics  and 
future  Western,  430;  theory  and  reality,  439; 
personal,  441;  popular  talent  and  leadership, 
441;  men  and  measures,  44i«.;  conscience- 
less “doing,”  441;  seasonableness,  command 
of  means,  443,  446;  cxcmplarincss  in  doing, 
443;  tact  of  command,  444;  tradition  of 
command,  444;  art  of  the  possible,  445  ; 
opportuneness,  446;  foreign  and  domestic, 
447;  early  cultural,  factions,  448;  urban,  and 
parties,  448,  party  and  estates,  449-451; 
displacement  of  party  by  private,  machine, 
451,  454,  464;  place  and  influence  of  theory, 
453-455;  Roman  demagogy,  elections  and 
courts,  457-460;  Western  demagogy,  press, 
460-463;  battle  between  democracy  and 
Cassarism,  463,  464;  hero-death,  471;  and 
religion,  473«.;  and  financial  credit,  49i». 
See  also  CxsiLtism;  Church  and  State;  Dynas- 
tic idea;  Estates;  Feudalism;  Foreign  rela- 
tions; History;  Polis;  Sex 

Polybius,  on  sterility,  104;  on  Flaminius,  411 

Polycrates,  and  finance,  383;  economics  and 
politics,  475 

Pompey  the  Great,  adventurer,  19;  principatc 
and  monarchy,  50;  and  Rome,  383;  Trium- 
virate and  Csesarism,  413;  at  Lucca,  446; 
demagogy,  458,  459 

Pompey,  Sextus,  and  Cxsarism,  4z8«. 

Pompon,  Frangois,  technique,  ixSn. 

Population,  megalopolitanism  and  sterility, 
103-105;  machine  and  increase,  50Z 

Porcelain,  Chinese  invention,  5oi«. 


Porphyry,  and  Greek  Church,  176;  Scholasti- 
cism, ZZ9;  ecstasy,  2.41;  community  of  elect, 
243;  on  divine  elements,  Z5Z 
Portiers,  importance  of  Saracen  defeat,  19Z 
Portraiture,  physiognomic  studies,  iz6n. 
Portugal,  separation  from  Spain,  390 
Possession,  concept,  480;  and  fortune,  483; 

Classical  land  and  money,  487 
Poverty,  Western  learning  and  vow,  346,  See 
also  Monasticism 

Power  and  booty,  344,  345,  347,  371,  372,  474 
Praetors,  urban,  374;  beginning,  381 
Precedent,  lack  in  Roman  law,  62.;  in  Arabian 
law,  71 

Predestination,  and  English  politics,  304.  See 
alsoWiW 

Premonstratensians,  as  rural,  91 
Pre-Socratics,  asceticism,  183 
Press,  and  free  opinion,  405 ; and  spatial  infinity, 
413;  as  political  means,  447;  power  in 
Western  demagogy,  460;  and  gunpowder 
and  war,  460;  expulsion  of  book  by  news- 
paper, 461;  dictum  as  public  truth,  461; 
education  as  instrument  of  power,  461; 
syndication,  as  army,  461;  censorship  of 
silence,  463 

Pretinax,  edict  on  untended  land,  106 
Priene,  plan,  100 

Priesthood,  primary  class,  97;  beginning  as 
estate,  and  nobility,  z8o;  and  time  myth- 
ology, z86;  Western,  and  contrition-concept, 
Z94,  Z94W.,  198;  relation  to  other  estates,  334, 
335;  symbolic  significance,  waking-being, 
causality,  335-338,  340;  relation  to  family 
and  dynasty,  337;  as  ornament,  idea  and 
person,  337,  338;  and  life,  339;  as  result  of 
shaping,  340;  and  heredity,  341;  moral,  341; 
and  property,  344;  and  learning,  style  influ- 
ence, 345-347,  478;  common  cultural  estate, 
350;  cultural  styles,  351;  conflict  with 
nobility,  35^-354;  city  movement,  effect, 
355 > 35^J  Western  law-making,  365; 

Classical,  as  city  officials,  381 
Priestley,  Joseph,  and  Third  Estate,  403/2. 
Primitive  man,  Ice  Age,  33,  34;  and  religion, 
Z75 . See  also  Man;  Peasantry 
Principate,  in  Pseudomorphosis,  349;  Sulla  a* 
heir,  4x3;  Augustus*  dyaixhy  as  nullity,  43z 
Printing,  symbolism,  413;  Chinese  invention, 
50122.  See  also  Press 
Priscus,  Heividius,  death,  434 
Private  law,  first  systematic,  66;  Western,  and 
Roman  law,  77,  79 

Proclus,  on  Chaldean  oracles,  Z45;  as  Syncretic 
Father,  Z5z;  biography,  Z5Z;  and  substance 
controversy,  hymn,  Z5722. 


XXIV  INDEX 


Procopius,  on  Narses  expedition,  zoo 
Proculiani,  legal  school,  style,  67,  346 
Profane,  as  concept,  345 
Proper,  and  ‘ ‘ alien  ’ ’ in  sensation,  6 
Property,  Classical  concept  and  Western  law,  82.; 
farmhouse  as,  90;  origin  of  idea,  groundness, 
343;  power  and  booty,  di-vergence,  344,  345, 
347>  37i>  37^,  474i  effect  of  money,  357; 
English  law,  371.  See  also  Economics;  Money; 
Roman  law 

Prophetic  religions.  See  Apocalyptic 
Protestantism,  See  Puritanism;  Reformation 
ProYinccs,  and  megalopoiitanism,  98,  99 
Pradentes,  law-men,  71 

Prussia,  as  Hohenzollern  creation,  182.;  political 
rise,  392.;  origin  of  finance,  489.  See  also 
Germany 

Psalms,  period,  149 

Psellus,  Michal  Constantine,  religiousness,  313 
Pseudo-Clementines,  romances,  a37 
Pseudomorphosis,  Justinian,  Christianity,  and 
Corpus  Juris,  74;  as  historical  term,  189; 
of  Arabian  Culture,  189, 190;  effect  of  Actium, 
191;  Charles  Martel  and  Western  avoidance, 
191;  Russia,  192.;  falsification  of  Arabian 
manifestations,  zoo;  aspects  of  Syncretism, 
101-^04;  Jewish  rescue  from,  2.10,  2.1 1; 
Catholic  Church  and  Marcionism,  zzj;  and 
substance  controversy,  Z5  6-15 8;  feudalism, 
349;  economics,  48o«.  See  also  Religion; 
Roman  law;  Syncretic  Church 
Psychology,  of  the  crowd,  18;  cultural  basis, 
271.' 

Ptah  of  Memphis,  and  dogma,  a8i 
Public  opinion,  rise,  status,  400;  and  press,  405 
Puicheria,  and  dynasty,  379 
Pumbeditha,  academy,  71 
Punctuation,  as  language  gesture,  134 
Punic  Wars,  economics  in,  410;  evolution  of 
ruthlessness,  41^ 

Purgatory  of  learning,  346», 

Puritan  Revolution,  as  Fronde,  389,  390 
Puritanism,  Islam  as,  74,  30i“3o4;  basis,  com- 
mon cultural  manifestation,  3oz-305;  and 
concepts,  303;  Pythagoreans,  303;  predestina- 
tion and  politics,  304;  and  Rationalism,  305; 
Jewish,  316;  and  Fronde  and  Tyrannis,  386«.; 
and  English  Fronde,  389,  390 
Pydna,  battle,  importance,  190,  409/2. , 42a. 
Pyramids,  as  cosmic,  ^z 
Pyrrhonian  scepsis,  and  Socrates,  309 
Pythagoras,  fictitious,  72^.;  and  commentary, 
247/2.;  biography,  z^z 

Pythagoreans,  mysteries,  ao3;  and  cult,  z8z; 
Puritanism,  3oz,  303;  missionarism,  305; 
style,  345;  Sybaris,  394 


Qaraites,  Puritanism,  rise,  155,  316 
Qaro,  Joseph,  as  expositor,  3Z1 
Quirinus  Pater,  god,  381 
Quirites,  origin  of  name,  38^ 

Rabbi,  law-man,  71 

Race,  false  idea  of  people,  113,  165;  and  land- 
scape, no  migration,  113,  119,  1x9;  defined, 
1 13;  and  development  of  language,  being  and 
waking-being,  113,  114;  sensation,  114; 
in  plants,  115;  and  history  and  politics,  1 16; 
and  totem,  116;  not  classification  but  physi- 
ognomic fact,  1 17,  130;  American,  119; 
house  as  expression,  izo~izz;  castle  as  ex- 
pression, izz;  superficial  and  divergent 
mechanistic  conception,  IZ4,  1x5,  119;  hall- 
marks, inadequacy  of  skeietonic  determina- 
tion, 124,  ii8"I3o,  175;  chaotic  “living” 
elements  in  determination,  iz6,  izy;  race- 
feeling as  race-forming,  iz6;  statistics  and 
ancestry,  izy;  importance  of  movement- 
expression,  izS;  spiritual  differences,  iz8; 
and  sentences,  14Z;  and  writing,  15 1;  and 
Culture-language,  153,  154;  cosmic  beat 
and  race  hatred,  165,  166,  318;  and  intellect, 
166;  absolutist  State  as  expression,  400; 
Cxsarism  and  return  to  power,  431.  See  also 
Being;  Language;  Nation;  People;  Politics 
Radio,  and  light,  9/2.;  as  megalopolitan,  95/2.; 
and  distance,  i5o«.;  and  political  tactics, 
460 

Rainald  van  Dassel,  policy,  376 
Rameses  III,  and  sea-folks,  izz,  164/2.;  history- 
less,  43Z 

Ramnes,  tribe,  351,  38Z 
Ranke,  Johannes,  on  skull  forms,  iz8,  IZ9 
Ranke,  Leopold  von,  on  history,  46 
Raskol  movement,  Z78 

Rationalism,  and  Puritanism,  305;  basis,  cul- 
tural manifestations,  305,  308,  309;  sage,  307; 
Mysticism  and  Pietism,  308;  dynamic  char- 
acter of  Western,  309;  mock-religion^  310; 
fading-out,  310;  rise  in  politics,  400;  and 
money,  401,  40Z;  in  England,  403;  and  class 
dictatorship,  403,  404;  and  constitutions, 
413;  and  effective  political  theory,  453,  454 
Ravenna,  Theodcric’s  tomb,  89 
Re  cult,  Z79,  z8i ; as  Reformation,  Z96 
Reading,  defined,  149 
Reason,  content,  6;  and  understanding,  13 
Reflection,  and  grammar,  141,  143 
Reformation,  as  general  cultural  movement, 
Z95-Z97;  Western,  as  Gothic,  Z96;  and 
Renaissance,  background,  Z97;  narrow  circle 
of  understanding,  Z98;  and  Devil-cult,  Z99; 
Calvin  and  world-politics,  199;  relation  to 


INDEX 


intciiectuai  creation,  300;  and  oligarchy, 

, 386«.' 

Reger,  Max,  “playing*’  with  music,  137 

Rcitzenstcin,  Richard,  on  Jesus  as  Mandsean, 

Religion,  fear  of  the  invisible,  8;  as  basis  of 
science,  13;  and  causality,  14;  and  theoretical 
knowledge,  15;  Arabian  consensus,  59; 
Arabian  cults  and  scripts,  73,  150,  2:Ljn.; 
expression-language  and  communication-lan- 
guage, 1 16,  134;  and  language-linkage,  116; 
and  knowledge,  136;  names  and  religious 
thought,  139;  and  rigid  language,  154,  155; 
Persian,  168;  and  Arabian  nationality,  168, 
174-178,  aio,  141,  ^43, 2.53, 315,  317;  Arabian, 
and  research,  191;  geographical  cults  of 
Classical,  loo;  Arabian  fourth  period,  Mysti- 
cism and  Scholasticism,  xoo,  150;  Arabian 
henotheism,  aoi;  Arabian  dogmatic,  101; 
Arabian  prophetic,  Messianism,  104-2.07, 
Z09;  awakening  of  Arabian,  208,  249;  second 
or  apocalyptic  period,  208,  212,  249;  as 
lived  metaphysics^  217;  distinct  Arabian 
domains,  228;  Arabian  dualism,  spirit  and 
soul,  233-236;  inward  unity  of  Arabian,  235, 
248;  Arabian  Logos  and  light-sensation,  236, 
237;  Arabian  time-concept,  238, 249;  Arabian 
submission,  Grace,  240;  Arabian  community 
of  the  elect,  242,  243,  253;  Arabian  sacred 
books  and  revelation,  243-146;  infallible 
Word  and  interpretation,  secret  revelation, 
245-147;  third  Arabian  period,  religions  of 
salvation,  grand  myths,  249;  three  directions 
of  Arabian  forms,  251-253;  Arabian  monasti- 
cism,  254;  Arabian  missionarism,  259;  end 
of  Arabian  inner  history,  261;  and  being  and 
waking-being,  fear  and  love,  265,  499;  and 
light,  265;  intellect  and  faith,  266,  269-271; 
cultural  basis  of  fate,  2.67;  theory  and  tech- 
nique, myth  and  cult,  268, 271;  God  and  soul, 
cultural  basis  of  understanding  of  numina, 
270;  faith  and  life,  271,  443;  works  and 
moral,  271,  272;  moral  and  negations  on 
being,  272-274;  and  social  ethics,  273; 
cultural  basis  of  truth,  274;  morphology  of 
history,  275;  primitive  organic  religiousness, 
275,  276,  278;  “pre ’’-periods  of  Cultures, 
276-278;  of  Cultures  and  landscape,  278; 
beginning  in  Cultures,  279;  cultural  character 
and  prime  symbols,  279;  Egyptian,  279,  281; 
beginning  of  priesthood  estate,  280;  peasant, 
280;  narrow  circle  of  cultural  understanding, 
280,  282;  obscurity  of  Classical  beginning, 
281-283;  outline  of  Classical  beginning,  283, 
284,  29o».;  Classical  unity,  Greek  and  Roman 
cults,  284,  285;  later  Classical,  285;  Chinese 


beginning,  285-287;  Chinese  tao,  287; 
newness  of  Western,  depth-experience  as 
symbol,  288,  294«.7  reformation  as  general 
cultural  movement,  295-297;  and  Western 
practical  mechanics,  300-302;  Puritanism, 
302-305,  316;  Rationalism,  305-308;  Pietism, 
308;  cultural  basis  of  mechanistic  conception, 
308,  309;  Rationalism  and  myth  fads,  310; 
second  religiousness,  3 10-3 14;  history  less 
fellah,  314;  phase  in  anti-Semitism,  321,  322; 
phase  of  Fronde  and  Tyrannis,  386;  and 
church,  443«.;  and  economics,  473;  and 
technique,  502.  See  also  Causality;  Chris- 
tianity; Church  and  State;  Death;  Jews; 
Philosophy;  Priesthood;  Pseudomorphosis; 
Puritanism;  Reformation;  Sacred  books; 
Soul;  Spirit;  creeds  and  sects  by  name 
Renaissance,  history-picture,  iSw.;  relation  to 
Classical  Culture,  58;  style  as  urban,  93, 
297;  and  Italian  nationalism,  182;  as  Gothic, 
291;  and  personality,  293;  and  Reformation, 

2.97 

Republic,  Western,  as  negation,  413.  See  also 
Democracy;  Parliamentarism 
Resaina,  school,  200 

Resh-Galutha,  72;  position,  177,  208,  210 
Resurrection,  as  Arabian  principle,  59;  effect 
on  Christianity,  218 
Retz,  Cardinal  de,  Fronde,  390 
Retzius,  Anders  A.,  and  skull-forms,  128 
Revelation,  Arabian  concept,  243-246;  secret, 
246 

Revolution,  period,  387;  Classical  occurrence, 
394,  405;  French,  as  unique  manifestation, 
411;  Parliamentarism  as  continuance,  415; 
Arabian  period,  424.  See  also  Democracy; 
Politics 

Rhegium,  democratic  triumph,  396 
Rhodes,  Cecil,  actuality  of  leadership,  369; 
significance,  435;  money  and  power,  459, 
475>475 

Rhodes,  plan,  100;  siege,  421 
Rhodesia,  oval  house,  122 
Richard  I of  England,  imperial  vassal,  374 
Richelieu,  Cardinal  de,  power,  389,  390 
Robert  the  Devil,  and  finance,  372 
Robespierre,  Maximilian,  adventurer,  19;  State- 
machine,  404,  405;  as  mass-leader,  448W. 
Rodbertus,  Johann  K.,  and  class  dictatorship, 
404  ^ 

Roc,  Sir  Thomas,  Turkish  mission,  43». 

Roger  II  of  Sicily,  finance,  489 
Roman  Catholic  Church,  Classical  survivals  in 
popular,  no;  and  style  of  Western  learning, 
346;  changed  basis  of  politics,  45 1».  See 
also  Christianity;  Papacy 


XXVI 


INDEX 


Roman  law,  basis  in  Classical  world,  persona 
and  m,  €o;  and  divine  law,  6o;  as  product  of 
practical  experience,  no  legal  class,  6i;  and 
Greek  law,  jus  civile  and  jus  gentium,  city  law, 
6i,  6z;  lack  of  precedent,  Englisli  contrast, 
6z,  63;  “collection**  not  “system,**  63;  lack 
of  early  stratification,  64;  codes  as  party 
politics,  64;  jus  gentium  as  imperial,  66; 
Hadiran’s  edict  and  petrification,  66;  develop- 
ment of  jurisprudence,  66;  period  of  maturity, 
66;  lack  of  basic  ideas,  67;  schools,  67;  law 
of  bodies,  statics,  67;  and  Arabian  juridical 
person,  67,  68,  174,  177;  and  Arabian  creed- 
communities,  emperor-worship,  68,  69;  Con- 
stantine and  orthodox  Christian  law,  69,  70; 
position  of  Arabian-Latin  law,  jo-yz;  divine 
origin  and  Arabian  written  law,  precedent  and 
consensus,  72.-74;  framing  and  position  of 
Corpus  Juris,  religious  creation,  74;  inde- 
pendent development  of  Western  law-history, 
75;  development  of  Norman-English  law, 
75,  76,  78;  Germanic  law  in  Southern  Europe, 
76;  Maximilian’s  code,  76;  character  in 
Germany  and  Spain,  76,  77;  Corpus  Juris 
Canonici,  77;  Western  conflict  of  jas  and  jus, 
78;  effect  on  Western  culture,  book  and  life, 
78-80;  Classical  bodies  and  Western  func- 
tions, 8o-8i;  Western  emancipation  as  future 
task,  83,  491,  505;  and  established  church, 
lyyn.;  and  family,  330;  Western  estates  and, 

365 

Romanesque,  soul,  180 

Romanos,  power,  4x6 

Romans,  origin  of  name,  38z 

Romanticism,  and  world-literature,  108;  and 
idea  of  people,  1 13;  and  apocalyptic,  z-^6, 
2.37,  a5o 

Rome,  collapse  of  empire,  4z;  historyfiil  and 
history  less,  50;  as  capital  city,  95;  as  pro- 
vincial city,  99;  Classical  block-tenements, 
101;  suburbs  of  modern  city,  decay  of 

city,  107;  city  as  Etruscan,  164;  people  of 
city,  166;  political  character,  173,  174; 
reason  for  rise,  cultural  necessity,  185,  412.; 
cults  and  Greek  cults,  184;  family  history, 
336;  first  settlements  and  tribes,  351,  381; 
Plebs  as  Third  Estate,  357,  408;  vis-h-vis 
Carthage,  368;  early  oligarchy,  375;  aristo- 
cratic control,  attitude  toward  residue,  375, 
382.;  empire  as  polis,  383;  polis  and  citizen- 
ship, 383,  384;  fifth-century  relations,  394- 
398;  status  of  Tribunate,  395,  4i5«.;  Senate 
and  Tribunate,  opposition  as  “form,”  397; 
period  of  military  control,  407;  and  border 
states,  407;  control  by  political  nobility. 
Senate  as  engine,  409-41 1;  money  in  politics. 


demagogy,  410,  41 1,  457-459;  evolution  and 
completion  of  Csesarism,  41^,  413,  430, 
43Z-434;  political  factions  and  parties,  450; 
courts  and  politics,  459;  finance,  487,  494,  495 
Roosevelt,  Theodore,  on  race  suicide,  106 
Rossbach,  battle,  importance,  i8x 
Rothschilds,  founding  of  fortune,  4oz^. 
Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  Rationalism,  307;  and 
class  dictatorship,  404;  end  of  influence,  454 
Ruach,  connotation,  Z34 
Rubens,  Peter  Paul,  “tigress’*  expression,  iz8«. 
Rumanian,  3 8z 
Rumina,  goddess,  38Z 

Russian  Culture,  pseudomorphosis,  and  Western 
Culture,  19Z-194;  and  towns,  194;  Dostoyev- 
ski  and  Tolstoi  as  types,  194-196;  position 
of  Bolshevism,  195;  regular  and  secular 
clergy,  Z54;  pre-culturai  religiousness,  Z78; 
soul-character,  z^^n.;  unreal  classes, 
mir,  348;  and  money,  495 present  Christi- 
anity, 495M.;  and  machine,  504^. 
Russo-Japanese  War,  and  military  art,  4Z1 

Saba,  ignored  history,  190;  feudalism,  196-198; 
geography,  \^6n.;  religion,  Z09,  Z53;  chron- 
ology, Z39 
Sabazius,  cult,  zoi 
Sabbath,  Chaldean  and  Jewish,  Z07 
Sabiniani,  legal  school,  style,  67,  346 
Sachsenspiegel,  64,  76 

Sacraments,  Pagan,  Z03;  Western  concept,  and 
free  will,  Z93;  effect  of  Reformation,  Z98. 
See  also  Contrition 

Sacred  books,  Arabian  notion,  revelation, 
Z43-Z46;  cultural  attitude,  z44?2.;  infalli- 
bility, interpretation,  secret  revelation,  Z45- 
Z47;  allegorical  exegesis,  Z47;  commentary 
and  authoritative  chain,  249,  Z50.  See  also 
Bible 

Sadducees,  tendency,  zii 
Sage,  as  ideal,  307 
Sahara,  extension,  39«. 

Saint-Simon,  Comte  de,  and  class  dictatorship, 
404 

Saint-Simon,  Due  de,  on  nobility  and  nation, 
17Z;  on  new  nobility,  357??. 

Salisbury,  Marquess  of,  and  family,  393 
Salman,  trial,  317 

Samarra,  plan,  100;  area,  loin.;  abandoned, 

■107 

Samuel,  lord  of  A1  Aiblaq,  198 

San  Gemigniano,  fortified  towers,  355?2. 

Sankhara,  Neo-Brahmanism,  315 

Sapor  I,  and  Mazdaism,  Z51 

Saracens,  Charles  Martel’ s victory,  19Z.  See  also 

:X' Islam' 


INDEX 


Saragossa,  General  Privilege,  373 
Sarapion,  anchorite,  2.54 
Sards,  as  name,  164 
Sargon,  contemporaries,  39 
Sassanids,  study  neglected,  38,  190,-  feudalism, 
196-198,  42.3;  Mazdaic  State  religion,  ^53; 
nobility  and  priesthood,  353;  as  model  for 
Byzantine  ceremonial,  yj^n. 

Savelli,  and  Papacy,  354 
Saviour,  as  title,  2-i9«. 

Savonarola,  Girolamo,  and  Renaissance,  ^91; 

and  reform,  urbanism,  2.96, 197 
Saxony,  dynastic  influence,  i8z 
Scasvola,  Q.  Mucius,  private-law,  66 
Scent,  man’s  relation,  7,  115.  See  also  Sense 
Schadow,  Johann  Gottfried,  art,  118 
Schiele,  Friedrich  M.,  on  Sadducees  and  Essencs, 
xiin. 

Schinkel,  Hans  F,,  art,  118 
Scholasticism,  Arabian  and  Pseudomorphic,  71, 
aoo,  aa8,  119,  a5o;  of  Rationalism,  305-308; 
intellectual  discipline,  463 
Schuda,  legends,  X50 
Schwahenspiegel,  76 

Science.  See  Intelligence,  Natural  science 
Scipio,  P.  Cornelius  (Africanus  Major),  and 
]x)rdcr  States,  408;  and  Cato,  411;  and  Im- 
perialism, 4ix;  and  political  organization,  451 
Scipio,  P Cornelius  (Africanus  Minor),  murder, 
42.3;  and  Imperialism,  430;  and  political 
organization,  451 
Scots,  and  divine-given  torments, 

Script.  See  Writing 
Sea-folk,  and  Egypt,  107,  I2J.,  119,  164 
Second  religiousness,  in  Mexican  Culture,  45«./ 
period  and  character,  310;  Syncretism,  311- 
313;  emperor-cult  and  fixed  organizations, 
314;  and  Cassarism,  ^86n.j  Western,  455 
Seibal,  and  Mexican  Culture,  44 
Selcucid  Empire,  as  Arabian,  190;  era,  139 
Senate,  Roman,  and  Tribunate,  397,  398;  and 
political  nobility,  409;  Augustus’  dyarchy 
as  nullity,  43^;  and  courts,  460;  economics 
and  politics,  475 

Senatus  Populusq^ue  Romanus,  as  Senate  and 
Tribunate,  398;  formal  restoration,  433 
Seneca,  L.  Annaeus,  religiousness,  313 
Sensation-content,  6 

Sense,  as  microcosmic  organ,  and  understand- 
ing, 5,  6,  9;  human  and  animal,  114,  115; 
and  relation  of  microcosm  to  macrocosm,  499. 
Jee  also  Sight 

Sentence,  origin,  and  word,  141;  and  race,  142.; 

verbs,  143.  See  also  t.mpizgt 
Sentinum,  battle,  importance,  4ZZ 
Sepoy  Mutiny,  cultural  basis,  3zi?2; 


xxvii 

Septimus  Severus,  historyless,  43  z 

Serapis-cult,  origin,  310 

Sertorius,  Quintus,  and  Caesarism,  4x8?^. 

Sesostris  I,  absolutism,  387 
Sesostris  III,  absolutism,  387 
Sethc,  Kurt,  on  Egyptian  script,  io8w. 

Seuse,  Heinrich,  on  Mysticism,  xyx 
Sex,  cosmic  organ,  5;  Civilization  and  sterility, 
103-105;  “versehen,  ” iz6;  conception  as 
sin,  zyz;  and  Classical  cults,  Z83;  orgiasm 
and  asceticism,  Z83;  elements  of  duality,  war, 
3x7,  3x8;  and  “form,”  331;  and  State,  36X. 
See  also  Family;  Monasticism 

Sforza,  Catherine,  heroism,  3x8 
Shak-cl-Arab,  Mandasanism,  zi4«. 

Shamir  Juharish,  feudalism,  196 
Shan-Kwo  Period,  416 
Shang  dynasty,  mythology,  x86,  379®. 
Shantung,  Manichasans,  Ncstorians,  and  Islam, 
z6o,  z6i 

Shaping,  and  training,  331,  340 
Shaw,  George  Bernard,  on  free  woman,  105; 
Undershaft  as  type,  475«.;  on  money  and  life, 
484 

Sheridan,  Richard  B.  B.,  and  French  Revolution, 
412. 

Shi,  as  title,  41,  418 

Shi-hwang-ti,  and  second  religiousness,  310; 

and  Chinese  history,  434 
Shi-King,  as  religious  source,  z86;  love  songs, 
35Z 

Shia,  and  Chaldean,  176 
Shiites,  Logos-idea,  X36W.;  beginning,  4x4 
Shirazi,  philosophy,  3x1 
Shneor  Zalman  ben  Baruch.  See  Salman 
Shu-Ching,  as  religious  source,  x86 
Shuiski,  Vassili,  period,  19Z 
Sibylline  books,  character  of  Classical,  x^n. 
Sicily,  Norman  state,  37Z,  489;  democratic 
triumph,  396;  and  Maniakes,  4X7«. 

Siculi,  as  name,  164 
Siena,  fortified  towers,  355 
Sight,  as  supreme  sense,  6;  bodily  and  mental, 
7;  and  waking-being,  7;  lordship  in  man, 
7-9;  invisible  and  fear,  8;  and  race,  114,  1x8; 
and  words,  140;  and  verbs,  143 ; Arabian  light- 
sensation,  “cavern”  and  Logos,  X33,  X36, 
X37;  light  and  religion,  165.  See  also  Sense 
Sign,  and  language,  134;  and  script,  149 
Signorelli,  Luca,  frescoes  and  the  Devil,  x^m. 
Simplicius,  and  commentary,  X47 
Sinuhet,  biography,  3 87 

Skeleton,  and  race,  1x4,  1x8-130,  175;  and 
landscape,  130 
Sklcros,  power,  4x7 
Skoptsi,  as  manifestation,  X78 


INDEX 


Skull.  See  Skeieton 

Slavery,  Roman  freedmen  and  citizensiiip,  iB6n,j 
Classical  and  money,  end,  349«.,  480,  488, 
496;  Irak  rebellion,  4x6;  attitude  of  Plebs, 
technique,  479«.,  503;  Western  status, 

488W. 

Sleep,  as  vegetable,  7 

Smith,  Adam,  relation  to  property,  345;  and 
Hume,  403 ; and  economic  thought,  469; 
theory  of  value,  491 

Smith,  Elliot,  ethnological  research,  1x9 
Smiths,  guild  and  tribe,  479 
Socialism,  money  and  movement,  40^;  effect 
on  Capitalism,  454,  464^2.,  ^o6n.;  and  Csesar- 
ism,  506.  See  also  Marx 
Society,  origin,  343 
Sociology,  Jesus’  indifference,  xjj 
Socrates^  Rationalism,  307;  as  spiritual  heir 
and  ancestor,  309 

Sohm,  Rudolf,  on  German  jurisprudence,  80 
Sol  Invictus,  cult,  aoi,-  and  Syncretism,  153 
Solomon,  fictitious,  jxn.;  Psalms, 

Solon,  Egyptian  influence,  6zn.;  character  of 
law,  63-65;  and  impiety,  x8a;  economics 
and  politics,  475 

Sombart,  Werner,  on  book-keeping,  490 
Sophists,  and  Socrates,  309;  and  Chinese 
Catsarism,  418 

Sorel,  Albert,  and  French  Revolution,  399«. 
Soul,  cultural  and  intercultural  forms,  56; 
cultural  significance,  59;  of  town,  90;  and 
language,  137;  and  people,  165;  and  spirit 
in  Arabian  dualism,  indwelling,  X34-136; 
Western  and  Russian,  See  Religion; 

Spirit;  Will 

Sound,  as  sign  of  language,  word,  134 
Space,  extension  and  waking-being,  7;  and 
truths,  li;  Arabian  concept,  133;  and  time 
and  religion,  z65  . See  also  Time 
Spain,  physical  changes,  39??,/  and  Roman  law, 
77;  Jewish  culture,  316;  period  of  absolut- 
ism, 388;  Fronde  conflict,  390;  origins  of 
accountancy,  489 

Sparta,  helots,  331,  349,  357;  Athens, 

368;  royal  succession,  380;  oligarchic- 
democratic  struggle,  396,  397 
Spartacus,  and  Cassarism,  42.8«. 

Spartiates,  as  feudal,  375 
Speaking,  and  language,  117,  1x5 
Speculators,  as  cultural  phenomenon,  484 
Spence,  Lewis,  on  Mexican  chronology,  44«. 
Spencr,  Philipp  J.,  Pietism,  308 
Spenta  Mainyu,  Persian  Holy  Spirit,  144 
Sphxrus,  influence,  45472. 

Spinden,  Herbert  J.,  researches  in  Mexican 
Culture,  44#2. 


Spinoza,  Baruch,  Gnosis,  zzS;  Arabian  meta- 
physic, Z41,  3zi;  on  contemplation,  2jfL; 
expulsion,  317 

Spirit,  Arabian  pneuma,  57;  and  soul  in  Arabian 
dualism,  indwelling,  Z34-Z36.  See  also  Body; 
Religion;  Soul;  Waking-being 
Sport,  and  Civilization,  103 
Stanley,  Arthur  P.,  on  Islam  and  Christianity, 
30422. 

State.  See  Politics 

States-Generai,  calling,  373;  overthrow,  388 
Statics,  Roman  law,  67 
Steam-engine,  effect,  5oz 
Stein,  Lorenz  von,  on  money,  485 
Stenography,  character,  15Z 
Sterility,  and  Civilization,  103-105 
Stoicism,  and  jurisprudence,  6z;  Rationalism, 
307;  Pietism,  308;  and  second  religiousness, 
3iz;  style  of  school,  345 ; improvidence,  371; 
and  Gxsarism,  ideologues  and  conspiracy, 
433,  434;  political  influence,  454 
Streets,  cultural  attitude,  94 
Stuarts,  and  Roman  law,  36572.;  and  dynasty, 
388,  389 

Studion,  monk-state,  314 
Style,  Western,  external  effects,  46;  intercul- 
tural, 87-89;  as  urban,  9z;  and  Civilization, 
108,  109;  rigid  and  living,  surface  mixture, 
1Z3;  priesthood  and,  of  learning,  345 
Su-tsin,  career,  417;  character,  419 
Subjects  and  objects,  369;  in  politics,  441;  in 
economics,  479,  493 
Submission,  as  Arabian  concept,  Z40 
Substance,  Arabian  religious  concept,  Z44; 
controversy  and  Christian  split,  Z55-Z58.  See 
also'Xtimtf 

Succession  Wars,  character,  39Z 
Sudra,  as  caste,  33Z;  and  tribes,  348 
Sufism,  and  Chaldean,  176;  Gnosis,  zz8;  and 
contemplation,  Z4Z;  Pietism,  308;  and  Jew- 
ish Mysticism,  3Z1.  See  also  IslBm;  Mysticism 
Sulla,  L*  Cornelius,  and  princeps,  4Z3;  and 
demagogy,  458;  and  courts,  460 
Sultanate,  rise  over  caliphate,  415,  4Z6 
Sumer,  and  Arabian  Culture,  18971. 

Sun-tse,  on  war,  4177?.,  41972.;  character,  41972.; 

anecdote,  4Z072. 

Sura,  academy,  71,  zoo 

Swedenborg,  Emanuel,  Pietism,  308;  and 
Yesirah,  316 

Sybaris,  destruction,  303,  394 
Symbolism,  farmhouse,  90;  peacock,  Z36; 
cultural  religious  prime  symbols,  Z79,  zSy, 
z88;  colour,  Z89;  clock,  30072.;  Wandering 
Jew,  317;  printing,  413;  Classical  coin,  486 
Syncretic  Church,  and  emperor- worship,  68; 


INDEX 


as  name,  68^.;  cuits  and  “Greeks,”  176; 
Arabian  clinrclics  in  Classical  style,  2.01; 
reversal.  Classical  cults  as  Eastern  Church, 
zoz;.  Paganism  and  Christianity,  sacraments 
and  other  elements,  2.03,  104;  Jewish  rescue 
from,  aio;  Jesus  sects,  zzon,;  development, 
parallelism,  X5a,*  State  religion,  153;  monas- 
ticism,  154;  westward  expansion,  a55; 
missionarism,  X59;  end  of  theology,  z6i.  See 
also  Pseudomorphosis;  Religion 
Syncretism,  in  second  religiousness,  311-313.  See 
also  preceding  title 
Synesius,  as  Neo-Platonist,  Z'p. 

Synod  of  a Hundred  Chapters,  ayS 

Synod  of  Antichrist,  2.78 

Synoecism,  Classical,  173,  355,  381,  38Z;  Roman, 

383 

Syntax,  and  grammar,  141;  period,  145 
Syracuse,  as  provincial  city,  99;  as  megalopolis, 
38i«.;  democratic  triumph,  396;  coloniza- 
tion, 405;  class  proscriptions,  405, 
siege,  411;  and  Plato’s  theory,  454 
Syrian  Law-book,  importance,  64,  70 
Szc-ma-tsien,  on  Contending  States,  417;  as 
compiler,  4i8?2.;  biographies,  454^. 

Taboo,  relation  to  waking-being  and  language, 
116,  154;  dependence  on  totem,  117,  z<oy,  in 
art,  1 18;  and  cathedral,  111;  and  script,  15 1; 
space-fear,  z€y,  and  technique,  z68,  zji; 
moral,  and  negations,  xyz,  341.  See  also 
Totem 

Tacitus,  Cornelius,  on  Decemvirs’  code,  65; 
philosophical  confusion,  138;  and  polls, 
383,*  on  Musonius  Rufus,  430;  and  Csesarism, 
434«* 

Tai-dsung,  and  Islam,  z6i 
Talieyrand-Perigord,  Charles  de,  as  politician, 
446 

Talmud,  as  creed  law,  69;  and  Chaldean,  176; 

development,  influences,  zo8,  2.09 
Tammany  Hall,  as  type,  451^. 

Tannaim,  class,  71 
Tanvaser,  and  new  Avesta,  Z50,  Z5i 
Taoism,  and  Pacifism,  185;  principle,  187; 
alteration  in  concept,  307;  expansion,  308; 
Syncretism,  31Z,  315;  of  Han  period,  314; 
and  priesthood,  3 51;  and  Cxsarism,  434». 
Tarquins,  fail,  65 
Tarragona,  Jewish  city,  316 
Tartars,  Russian  release,  19Z 
Taxes,  purpose,  475«. 

Tchun-tsin-fan-lu,  454«. 

Technique,  and  truth,  i44«.;  and  theory 
in  religion,  z68,  zyi;  and  Classical  city- 
religions,  Z85;  and  Western  science,  300,  30a.; 


and  Rationalism,  306;  development  of 
military,  410-420.;  influence  on  Western 
economic  thought,  469;  machines  and  West- 
ern slavery,  488«.;  and  plant,  499;  of  animal 
movement,  involuntary,  499;  conscious- 
knowing,  499;  tyrannical  theory,  500; 
development  out  of  nature,  500;  under 
Classical  Culture,  500;  Western  passion, 
Gothic,  501;  effect  of  steam-engine,  501; 
religious  origin,  and  Devil,  501,  504,  5o4«,, 
505;  Western  and  infinity,  conquest  of  na- 
ture, 503,  504;  machine-industry  as  master 
of  Western  Civilization,  504;  its  agents, 
504;  machine-industry  as  Western  bourgeois, 
504«.;  other  Cultures  and  machine,  504W.;  en- 
gineer as  priest,  505;  struggle  with  money, 

505 

Telemachus,  and  dynasty,  380 
Telescope,  Chinese  invention,  5oi». 
Tell-el-Amarna  letters,  166 
Ten  Thousand,  as  polis,  iGon. 

Tenochtitlao,  destruction,  44;  founding,  char- 
acter, 45,  99 

Tension,  and  beat,  4;  and  waking-being,  7; 
and  Civilization  and  intelligence,  loi.  See 
Waking-being 

Tcrtullian,  Montanist,  117;  and  Western 
Church,  119;  period,  150 
Teutoburger  Wald,  Varus’  defeat,  ^Sn. 

Teutonic  Knights,  finance,  489 
Tezcuco,  as  world-city,  99 
Thebes,  as  Egypt,  95;  as  world-city,  99;  rise 
of  dynasty,  418 
Themis,  and  Dike,  376,  378 
Theocritus,  “ playing  ” with  expression,  137 
Theodcric,  tomb,  89 

Theodore  of  Studion,  and  I-eo  V,  415;  as  party 
leader,  449 

Theognis,  and  383 

Theory,  development,  dominance,  10,  500;  and 
technique  in  religion,  168,  171;  cultural 
attitude  toward  scientific,  301;  correctness 
and  technical  value,  500M- 
Thing,  legal  Classical  notion,  60 
Third  Estate,  See  Democracy 
Thirty  Years’  War,  as  consequence,  181;  political 
aspect,  388,  391;  Wallenstein’s  idea  and  fall, 
389 

Thomas,  Saint,  Gospel,  ii3».;  Acts,  romances, 
136,  zyn. 

Thomas  Aquinas,  philosophy,  ijzn,;  and  Devil- 
cult,  191;  and  sacraments,  193 
Thought,  defined,  development  of  theoretical, 
10;  and  life,  facts  and  truths,  11-13;  com- 
pulsion, ii;  causality-men,  place  in  life,  16- 
19.  Waking-being 


INDEX 


XXX 

Thucydides,  ahistoric,  24 
Thufii,  plaa,  100 
Tiberius,  as  historyful,  171;  economics  and 
politics,  43i,  475 
Tikai,  and  Mexican  Culture,  44 
Tiliy,  Count  of,  and  W alienstein,  389 
Time,  and  facts,  la;  and  dynastic-idea,  179; 
Arabian  concept,  ordained  period,  a38~24o, 
249;  and  space  and  religion,  ^65;  and  truth, 
xji;  mythology,  i86.  See  also  Being;  Des- 
tiny; History;  Space 

Tiresias,  and  Classical  religious  beginnings,  aSz, 
■■■■ '350"'''  ■ . 

Tities,  tribe,  351,  382. 

Tobit,  as  Arabian,  2,08 
Togrulbek,  power,  4x7 
Toledo,  Jewish  city,  316 

Toleration,  Classical  and  Arabian  attitude,  zo3 
Tolstoi,  Leo,  Western  soul,  194-196;  conception 
of  Jesus,  zi8 

Topinard,  Paul,  race  classification,  1Z5 
Totem,  relation  to  being  and  race,  116;  in  art, 
118;  and  dwelling-house,  izi;  and  castle, 
iiz;  in  language,  154;  time-fear  and  taboo, 
165;  moral,  341.  Taboo 

Touch,  as  primary  sense,  6.  See  also  Sense 
Tournament,  as  manifestation  of  nobility,  35Z 
Tours,  importance  of  Saracen  defeat,  19Z 
Town,  and  Culture,  90;  soul,  90;  relation  to 
country,  91;  cultural  type,  91;  and  market, 
91,  480;  and  style,  91;  "visage’*  as  cultural, 
93;  relation  to  landscape,  94;  city  history 
as  world-history,  95,  96;  domination  of 
capital  city,  cultural  basis,  95,  381;  and 
intellect,  96;  great  and  little,  spiritual  dis- 
tinction, 97;  and  monetary  idea,  and  dicta- 
torship, 97,  98;  Civilization  and  overflow, 
100;  and  writing,  151;  script  speech,  155; 
and  nations,  171;  Russia  and,  194;  and  Ren- 
aissance-Reformation movement,  Z97;  and 
science,  300;  and  Puritanism,  30Z;  and  Ra- 
tionalism, 305;  consciousness  and  personal 
freedom,  354,  356,  358;  burgher  estate,  355; 
movement  of  primary  estates  to,  355,  356; 
and  State-idea,  377;  relation  of  politics  and 
economics,  Capitalism,  476,  477,  493;  effect 
on  trade,  481,  484.  See  also  Causality;  Mcg- 
alopolitanism;  Polis;  Politics 
Trade,  and  politics,  474;  as  substitute  for  war, 
474.  See  also  Economics 
Tradition,  place  in  cultural  history,  338;  pre- 
vision law,  363;  of  political  leadership, 
444 

Training,  and  shaping,  331,  340 
Trajan,  historyless,  431 
Tramil®,  as  name,  164 


Transubstantiation,  new  English  controversy, 

Trdat  of  Armenia,  State  and  Church,  Z53 
Trebatius  Testa,  C.,  and  Cicero,  458», 

Tree  of  Knowledge,  and  cross,  180??. 

Tribes,  Arabian  pre-culturai  associations,  solu- 
tion, 174, 176;  as  names  for  priesthoods,  175; 
occupational,  348,  479 
Tribonian,  as  jurist,  73 

Tribunate,  and  Plebs,  357;  beginning,  status, 
as  lawful  Tyrannis,  394-398,  433;  consular, 
397;  and  Senate,  survival,  397,  398,  433; 
blind  incident,  Marius  as  heir,  413; 

and  party,  451 

Trinity,  and  Arabian  pneuma,  68,  244.  See  also 
Logos;  Substance 

Triumvirates,  and  border  States,  408;  and 
Cassarism,  413;  first,  454 
Troeltsch,  Ernst,  on  Augustine  as  Classical, 
Z41W. 

Trojan  War,  as  beginning  of  history,  zy;  feud 
or  crusade,  z8z 

Troubadours,  Arabian,  198;  relation  to  Renais- 
sance, Z97''  ' 

Truth,  and  facts,  ii,  iz,  47;  cultural  basis,  58; 
and  speech,  137, 144;  abstract  and  living,  147; 
Arabian  pneuma,  z4z;  Arabian  sacred  book, 
Z43;  experience,  z68;  and  time,  zyi;  and 
current  of  being,  history,  Z74;  and  politics, 
368;  influence  of  press,  461.  See  also  Ethics; 
Faith 

Tsh6u  Li,  on  officialdom,  37Z 
Tshun-tsin,  period,  391 
Tsi,  in  period  of  Contending  States,  417 
Tsin,  imperialistic  State,  38,  41;  and  Taoism, 
185;  and  Tsu,  368;  rise  in  period  of  Contend- 
ing States,  416-419 

Tsu,  and  Tsin,  368;  in  period  of  Contending 
States,  417,  418,  454 

Tung  Chung-Shu,  on  Middle  Kingdom,  373#z. 
Turfan  manuscripts,  zi3w.,  z5z 
Turgot,  Anne  R-  J.,  overthrow,  4113^. 

Turks,  and  Csesarism,  4x6,  417 
Tursha,  as  name,  164 

Twelve  Tables,  character,  63,  65;  importance, 
€^n.;  commentary,  66;  class  law,  365; 
significance,  overthrow,  396 
Tychc,  and  lot-choice  of  officials,  383 
Tyrannis,  first,  preceding  oligarchy,  375;  fall 
of  Tarquinian,  3 8z;  significance,  386;  and 
Tribunate,  struggle  for  lawful,  394-398; 
character  of  second,  405-408.  See  also  folhics 

Ujjaina,  as  world-city,  99 
Ulemas,  law-men,  71 
Ulpian,  as  jurist,  71 


xxxi 


INDEX 


Unam  smctam  bull,  376 

Understanding,  and  sensation,  6;  language  and 
emancipation,  thought,  9,  10;  and  reason, 
13;  meaning,  133,  136;  as  causal,  2.66;  and 
faith,  z66,  zS^zji 
United  States.  Sna  Americans 
Ur,  tombs,  35W, 

Uxmal,  and  Mexican  Culture,  45;  as  world-city, 

99 

Valentinian  III,  Law  of  Citations,  73,  248 
Valentinus,  period,  150^  and  substance,  156 
Value,  early  lack  of  concept,  480;  money  and 
vaiue-in-itself,  482.;  theories  as  subjective, 
48i«.;  money  and  standard,  485«.;  irrelation 
of  Classical  land  and  money,  487;  Classical 
attitude  toward  art,  487;  Western  concept  of 
work,  49 1-493 . See  also  Economics 
Varro,  M.  Terentius,  era,  X39 
Varus,  P.  Quintilius,  defeat,  site,  48,  487 
Vasari,  Giorgio,  and  return  to  nature,  191 
Vase-painting,  Exekias,  135 
Vasili  Blazheny,  style,  89 
Vassalage,  rise  and  significance,  349;  change 
to  money  basis,  357.  See  also  Feudalism; 
Slavery 

Vegetable.  See  Plant 

Venice,  and  money-outlook,  ^jn.;  small-scale 
traffic,  48 1«. 

Verbs,  place  in  language  development,  143 
Vergennes,  Comte  de,  as  end  of  period,  398 
Verres,  Caius,  wealth  as  object,  459 
Vespasian,  war  on  Judea,  2.10;  and  ideologues, 
434 

Vesta,  and  economics,  471 
Village,  and  town,  91 
Vindex,  unimportance,  50 
Virtue,  change  in  concept,  307 
Vladimir  of  Kiev,  epic  cycle,  191 
Vohu  Mano,  as  Word  of  God,  144 
Voltaire,  and  Rationalism,  305 
Vries,  Hugo  de,  mutation  theory,  3i«. 

Waking-being,  as  microcosmic,  and  being,  7,  ii, 
13;  visual  thought,  7-9;  language  and 
thought,  9,  10,  114;  life  and  thought,  facts 
and  truths,  1 1-13,  16;  adjustment  to  macro- 
cosm, 14, 14;  and  causality,  14;  and  problem 
of  motion,  death,  14-16;  and  intercultufal 
history,  56;  and  money,  98;  upward  scries 
of  utterances,  116;  and  taboo,  117;  willed 
activity,  133;  and  reflection,  141;  cultural 
oppositions,  i33;  and  religion,  ^65,  499; 
and  priesthood,  335;  and  economics,  473; 
and  sense,  499;  ultimate  fail,  507.  See  also 
Being;  Causality;  Economics;  Intelligence; 


Language;  Microcosm;  Religion;  Space; 
Town 

Wallenstein,  Albrecht  von,  idea,  power  and 
fall,  389 

Wandering  Jew,  symbolism,  317 
Wang,  as  title,  379 
Wang-Cheng,  rule,  41,  418,  413 
War,  and  politics  and  economics,  330,  366,  440, 
474;  and  nobility,  351;  as  great  creator,  361; 
as  normal  Classical  condition,  385;  character 
of  Baroque,  391;  Pe-Ki  as  general,  417??.; 
Sun-tse  as  authority,  417;?.,  419W.;  change  in 
character  under  Civilization,  4i9-42.x;  nine- 
teenth-century substitute,  42.8;  expected 
Western  period,  419;  as  cultural  necessity, 
42.9,  434;  relation  to  press,  460;  and  hunger, 
471.  See  also  Army;  Peace 
Wartburg,  cathedral  art,  1x3 
Washington,  plan,  zoom. 

Washington  Conference,  as  prelude  of  war,  430 
Wealth.  See  Economics;  Money 
Wedgwood,  Josiah,  ware,  491 
Wei-Yang,  character,  419 
Weill,  Raymond,  on  Hyksos,  4i8«. 

Weininger,  Otto,  Arabian  metaphysic,  311 
Weissenberg,  Samuel,  on  Jewish  type,  175 
Wellington,  Duke  of,  rise,  406 
Welser,  city  nobility,  356 
Wenceslaus,  as  emperor,  376 
Wesley,  John,  practical  Pietism,  308 
Westermann,  Dicdrich,  language  investigation, 
140 

Western  Culture,  as  historic,  2.8;  and  human 
and  universal  history,  i8;  individuality  in 
historical  attunement,  z%  30;  future  histori- 
cal achievement,  30,  46,  47,  55;  landscape 
and  outside  effect,  46;  transfer  of  Christianity 
to,  59,  2.35,  2.37,  X58;  independent  legal  de- 
velopment, 75,  76;  Roman  law  in,  76-78; 
effect  of  Roman  law,  78-83;  and  antique, 
79;  future  jurisprudence,  80-83,  505;  future 
cities,  101;  present  stage  of  Civilization,  109; 
and  mother  tongue,  12.0;  and  script,  150; 
and  people,  169;  nations  under,  dynastic- 
idea,  178-181,  378,  381;  races,  nations,  and 
dynasties,  181-183;  dynastic-idea  and  over- 
throw of  monarchy,  language-idea,  183; 
Charles  Martel  and  avoidance  of  pscudo- 
morphosis,  192.;  and  Russia,  192.;  newness  of 
religion,  depth-experience  as  symbol,  i88, 
2.94«.;  Mary-cult  and  Devil-cult,  z88-^l92.; 
guilt  and  free-will,  sacraments,  191,  Z93; 
contrition,  Z93-2.95;  personality-concept,  2.93; 
Calvin-Loyola  opposition  and  world-politics, 
X99;  and  practical  mechanics,  300;  dynamic 
character  of  Rationalism,  309;  probable 


XXXli 


INDEX 


character  of  second  religiousness, 
religion  and  style  of  learning,  346;  style  of 
nobility,  genealogical  principle,  350;  style 
of  priesthood,  35x;  relation  of  primary  es- 
tates, 353;  capital  city,  381;  reading  and 
writing,  413;  money  as  function,  489--493; 
capital  and  financial  organization,  493,  494; 
future,  507.  See  also  Baroque;  Cultures; 
Gothic;  Politics;  Technique 
Westminster  Confession,  on  Grace,  14a 
Westphalia,  Peace  of,  effect  on  nobility,  391 
Wiiamowitz-Moellendorff,  Ulrich  von,  on 
patriarchal  kingdom,  380^. 

Will,  Arabian  attitude,  submission,  a35,  Z40; 
Arabian  Grace,  241,  2.4z;  Western  free-will 
and  sacraments,  Z9z,  Z93;  Russian  attitude, 
Z95».;  inherited,  377 
William  I of  England,  and  property,  371 
William  of  Occam,  will  and  reason,  Z41 
Wilson,  Woodrow,  as  tool,  475 
Winchester,  Eng.,  as  royal  residence,  9i«. 
Winckler,  Hugo,  on  post-exilic  Jews,  Z05 
Witchcraft,  Western  cult,  191;  persecution,  302. 
Woman,  Sex 

Words,  cult-colouring  of  prime,  116;  as  lan- 
guage sound,  134;  as  to  origin,  137,  138; 
and  names,  138-141;  and  modern  gesture, 
i4o«.;  and  sentence,  141;  acquisition,  141; 
vocabularies  and  grammar,  147;  alien  prov- 
enance, 148;  and  conscious  technique,  499. 
See  also  hBXiguzgc 

Work,  quantity  and  quality  in  Western  concept 
of  value,  49i-'493 

Works,  religious  technique  and  moral,  %yz. 
See  also  Faith 

World-city.  See  Mcgalopolitanism 
World  War,  and  passage  to  Cxsarism,  418; 
effect  on  universal  military  service,  42.9; 
and  military  art,  47.1;  and  Marxism,  455; 
guilt  question,  46in,j  Allied  press  propa- 
ganda, qfizw.,  463 
Worms,  Diet  of,  code,  76 
Writing,  cultural  relation,  36,  146,  150; 

Arabian  religions  and  scripts,  73,  150,  ixyn,; 
Egyptian,  T08;  grammatical  decomposition. 


145,  146;  technique  of  signs  and  thoughts, 
146;  and  linguistic  history,  147,  and  “pres- 
ent,*' training,  149;  dependence  on  grammar, 
149;  and  reading,  149;  and  extension  and 
duration,  150;  and  historical  endowment, 
150;  and  colloquial  language,  150;  relation 
to  race,  as  taboo,  ornament,  15 1;  city  and 
utilitarian,  standardization,  15Z,  155;  stenog- 
raphy, 152;  dependence  of  world  history  on, 
153.  See  also  Language 
Wu,  State,  annihilation,  42JL 
Wu-ti,  as  ruler,  41,  431 

Wullenweber,  Jiirgen,  economics  and  politics, 
475 

Wundt,  Wilhelm  M.,  an  origin  of  language, 
138 

Wyciif,  John,  and  reform,  196 

Xenophon,  and  class  dictatorship,  404 

Yahweh  cult,  zoi 
Yang-Chu,  materialism,  309 
Yellow  Turbans,  insurrection,  314 
Yeomanry,  lack  in  England  and  United  States, 
449«.  See  also  Peasantry 
Yesirah,  rational  Mysticism,  316 
Yiddish,  character,  150W. 

Yorck  von  Wartenburg,  Graf,  and  Napoleon, 

4o6«. 

Zaddikism,  32a. 

Zalcucus,  laws,  64 

Zama,  battle,  and  Hellenism,  191,  4zz 
Zarathustra,  basis  of  religious  reform,  168; 
Jewish  contemporaries,  Z05.  See  also  Mazda- 
ism;  Zend  Avesta 
Zechariah,  Persian  influence,  xo8 
Zend  Avesta,  commentary,  147;  new,  Mazda- 
ism,  Z51 

Zeno,  and  property,  344 

Zimmern,  Heinrich,  on  Jesus  as  Mandsean,  Z14W. 

Zionism,  character,  zio 

Zoroaster,  Zarathustra 

Zrvanism,  rise,  138,  Z56 

Zwingli,  Ulrich,  as  Gothic,  ^96 


